
From my grandfather Verus I learned good morals and the government
of my temper. 

From the reputation and remembrance of my father, modesty and a manly
character. 

From my mother, piety and beneficence, and abstinence, not only from
evil deeds, but even from evil thoughts; and further, simplicity in
my way of living, far removed from the habits of the rich.

From my great-grandfather, not to have frequented public schools,
and to have had good teachers at home, and to know that on such things
a man should spend liberally. 

From my governor, to be neither of the green nor of the blue party
at the games in the Circus, nor a partizan either of the Parmularius
or the Scutarius at the gladiators' fights; from him too I learned
endurance of labour, and to want little, and to work with my own hands,
and not to meddle with other people's affairs, and not to be ready
to listen to slander. 

From Diognetus, not to busy myself about trifling things, and not
to give credit to what was said by miracle-workers and jugglers about
incantations and the driving away of daemons and such things; and
not to breed quails for fighting, nor to give myself up passionately
to such things; and to endure freedom of speech; and to have become
intimate with philosophy; and to have been a hearer, first of Bacchius,
then of Tandasis and Marcianus; and to have written dialogues in my
youth; and to have desired a plank bed and skin, and whatever else
of the kind belongs to the Grecian discipline. 

From Rusticus I received the impression that my character required
improvement and discipline; and from him I learned not to be led astray
to sophistic emulation, nor to writing on speculative matters, nor
to delivering little hortatory orations, nor to showing myself off
as a man who practises much discipline, or does benevolent acts in
order to make a display; and to abstain from rhetoric, and poetry,
and fine writing; and not to walk about in the house in my outdoor
dress, nor to do other things of the kind; and to write my letters
with simplicity, like the letter which Rusticus wrote from Sinuessa
to my mother; and with respect to those who have offended me by words,
or done me wrong, to be easily disposed to be pacified and reconciled,
as soon as they have shown a readiness to be reconciled; and to read
carefully, and not to be satisfied with a superficial understanding
of a book; nor hastily to give my assent to those who talk overmuch;
and I am indebted to him for being acquainted with the discourses
of Epictetus, which he communicated to me out of his own collection.

From Apollonius I learned freedom of will and undeviating steadiness
of purpose; and to look to nothing else, not even for a moment, except
to reason; and to be always the same, in sharp pains, on the occasion
of the loss of a child, and in long illness; and to see clearly in
a living example that the same man can be both most resolute and yielding,
and not peevish in giving his instruction; and to have had before
my eyes a man who clearly considered his experience and his skill
in expounding philosophical principles as the smallest of his merits;
and from him I learned how to receive from friends what are esteemed
favours, without being either humbled by them or letting them pass
unnoticed. 

From Sextus, a benevolent disposition, and the example of a family
governed in a fatherly manner, and the idea of living conformably
to nature; and gravity without affectation, and to look carefully
after the interests of friends, and to tolerate ignorant persons,
and those who form opinions without consideration: he had the power
of readily accommodating himself to all, so that intercourse with
him was more agreeable than any flattery; and at the same time he
was most highly venerated by those who associated with him: and he
had the faculty both of discovering and ordering, in an intelligent
and methodical way, the principles necessary for life; and he never
showed anger or any other passion, but was entirely free from passion,
and also most affectionate; and he could express approbation without
noisy display, and he possessed much knowledge without ostentation.

From Alexander the grammarian, to refrain from fault-finding, and
not in a reproachful way to chide those who uttered any barbarous
or solecistic or strange-sounding expression; but dexterously to introduce
the very expression which ought to have been used, and in the way
of answer or giving confirmation, or joining in an inquiry about the
thing itself, not about the word, or by some other fit suggestion.

From Fronto I learned to observe what envy, and duplicity, and hypocrisy
are in a tyrant, and that generally those among us who are called
Patricians are rather deficient in paternal affection. 

From Alexander the Platonic, not frequently nor without necessity
to say to any one, or to write in a letter, that I have no leisure;
nor continually to excuse the neglect of duties required by our relation
to those with whom we live, by alleging urgent occupations.

From Catulus, not to be indifferent when a friend finds fault, even
if he should find fault without reason, but to try to restore him
to his usual disposition; and to be ready to speak well of teachers,
as it is reported of Domitius and Athenodotus; and to love my children
truly. 

From my brother Severus, to love my kin, and to love truth, and to
love justice; and through him I learned to know Thrasea, Helvidius,
Cato, Dion, Brutus; and from him I received the idea of a polity in
which there is the same law for all, a polity administered with regard
to equal rights and equal freedom of speech, and the idea of a kingly
government which respects most of all the freedom of the governed;
I learned from him also consistency and undeviating steadiness in
my regard for philosophy; and a disposition to do good, and to give
to others readily, and to cherish good hopes, and to believe that
I am loved by my friends; and in him I observed no concealment of
his opinions with respect to those whom he condemned, and that his
friends had no need to conjecture what he wished or did not wish,
but it was quite plain. 

From Maximus I learned self-government, and not to be led aside by
anything; and cheerfulness in all circumstances, as well as in illness;
and a just admixture in the moral character of sweetness and dignity,
and to do what was set before me without complaining. I observed that
everybody believed that he thought as he spoke, and that in all that
he did he never had any bad intention; and he never showed amazement
and surprise, and was never in a hurry, and never put off doing a
thing, nor was perplexed nor dejected, nor did he ever laugh to disguise
his vexation, nor, on the other hand, was he ever passionate or suspicious.
He was accustomed to do acts of beneficence, and was ready to forgive,
and was free from all falsehood; and he presented the appearance of
a man who could not be diverted from right rather than of a man who
had been improved. I observed, too, that no man could ever think that
he was despised by Maximus, or ever venture to think himself a better
man. He had also the art of being humorous in an agreeable way.

In my father I observed mildness of temper, and unchangeable resolution
in the things which he had determined after due deliberation; and
no vainglory in those things which men call honours; and a love of
labour and perseverance; and a readiness to listen to those who had
anything to propose for the common weal; and undeviating firmness
in giving to every man according to his deserts; and a knowledge derived
from experience of the occasions for vigorous action and for remission.
And I observed that he had overcome all passion for boys; and he considered
himself no more than any other citizen; and he released his friends
from all obligation to sup with him or to attend him of necessity
when he went abroad, and those who had failed to accompany him, by
reason of any urgent circumstances, always found him the same. I observed
too his habit of careful inquiry in all matters of deliberation, and
his persistency, and that he never stopped his investigation through
being satisfied with appearances which first present themselves; and
that his disposition was to keep his friends, and not to be soon tired
of them, nor yet to be extravagant in his affection; and to be satisfied
on all occasions, and cheerful; and to foresee things a long way off,
and to provide for the smallest without display; and to check immediately
popular applause and all flattery; and to be ever watchful over the
things which were necessary for the administration of the empire,
and to be a good manager of the expenditure, and patiently to endure
the blame which he got for such conduct; and he was neither superstitious
with respect to the gods, nor did he court men by gifts or by trying
to please them, or by flattering the populace; but he showed sobriety
in all things and firmness, and never any mean thoughts or action,
nor love of novelty. And the things which conduce in any way to the
commodity of life, and of which fortune gives an abundant supply,
he used without arrogance and without excusing himself; so that when
he had them, he enjoyed them without affectation, and when he had
them not, he did not want them. No one could ever say of him that
he was either a sophist or a home-bred flippant slave or a pedant;
but every one acknowledged him to be a man ripe, perfect, above flattery,
able to manage his own and other men's affairs. Besides this, he honoured
those who were true philosophers, and he did not reproach those who
pretended to be philosophers, nor yet was he easily led by them. He
was also easy in conversation, and he made himself agreeable without
any offensive affectation. He took a reasonable care of his body's
health, not as one who was greatly attached to life, nor out of regard
to personal appearance, nor yet in a careless way, but so that, through
his own attention, he very seldom stood in need of the physician's
art or of medicine or external applications. He was most ready to
give way without envy to those who possessed any particular faculty,
such as that of eloquence or knowledge of the law or of morals, or
of anything else; and he gave them his help, that each might enjoy
reputation according to his deserts; and he always acted conformably
to the institutions of his country, without showing any affectation
of doing so. Further, he was not fond of change nor unsteady, but
he loved to stay in the same places, and to employ himself about the
same things; and after his paroxysms of headache he came immediately
fresh and vigorous to his usual occupations. His secrets were not
but very few and very rare, and these only about public matters; and
he showed prudence and economy in the exhibition of the public spectacles
and the construction of public buildings, his donations to the people,
and in such things, for he was a man who looked to what ought to be
done, not to the reputation which is got by a man's acts. He did not
take the bath at unseasonable hours; he was not fond of building houses,
nor curious about what he ate, nor about the texture and colour of
his clothes, nor about the beauty of his slaves. His dress came from
Lorium, his villa on the coast, and from Lanuvium generally. We know
how he behaved to the toll-collector at Tusculum who asked his pardon;
and such was all his behaviour. There was in him nothing harsh, nor
implacable, nor violent, nor, as one may say, anything carried to
the sweating point; but he examined all things severally, as if he
had abundance of time, and without confusion, in an orderly way, vigorously
and consistently. And that might be applied to him which is recorded
of Socrates, that he was able both to abstain from, and to enjoy,
those things which many are too weak to abstain from, and cannot enjoy
without excess. But to be strong enough both to bear the one and to
be sober in the other is the mark of a man who has a perfect and invincible
soul, such as he showed in the illness of Maximus. 

To the gods I am indebted for having good grandfathers, good parents,
a good sister, good teachers, good associates, good kinsmen and friends,
nearly everything good. Further, I owe it to the gods that I was not
hurried into any offence against any of them, though I had a disposition
which, if opportunity had offered, might have led me to do something
of this kind; but, through their favour, there never was such a concurrence
of circumstances as put me to the trial. Further, I am thankful to
the gods that I was not longer brought up with my grandfather's concubine,
and that I preserved the flower of my youth, and that I did not make
proof of my virility before the proper season, but even deferred the
time; that I was subjected to a ruler and a father who was able to
take away all pride from me, and to bring me to the knowledge that
it is possible for a man to live in a palace without wanting either
guards or embroidered dresses, or torches and statues, and such-like
show; but that it is in such a man's power to bring himself very near
to the fashion of a private person, without being for this reason
either meaner in thought, or more remiss in action, with respect to
the things which must be done for the public interest in a manner
that befits a ruler. I thank the gods for giving me such a brother,
who was able by his moral character to rouse me to vigilance over
myself, and who, at the same time, pleased me by his respect and affection;
that my children have not been stupid nor deformed in body; that I
did not make more proficiency in rhetoric, poetry, and the other studies,
in which I should perhaps have been completely engaged, if I had seen
that I was making progress in them; that I made haste to place those
who brought me up in the station of honour, which they seemed to desire,
without putting them off with hope of my doing it some time after,
because they were then still young; that I knew Apollonius, Rusticus,
Maximus; that I received clear and frequent impressions about living
according to nature, and what kind of a life that is, so that, so
far as depended on the gods, and their gifts, and help, and inspirations,
nothing hindered me from forthwith living according to nature, though
I still fall short of it through my own fault, and through not observing
the admonitions of the gods, and, I may almost say, their direct instructions;
that my body has held out so long in such a kind of life; that I never
touched either Benedicta or Theodotus, and that, after having fallen
into amatory passions, I was cured; and, though I was often out of
humour with Rusticus, I never did anything of which I had occasion
to repent; that, though it was my mother's fate to die young, she
spent the last years of her life with me; that, whenever I wished
to help any man in his need, or on any other occasion, I was never
told that I had not the means of doing it; and that to myself the
same necessity never happened, to receive anything from another; that
I have such a wife, so obedient, and so affectionate, and so simple;
that I had abundance of good masters for my children; and that remedies
have been shown to me by dreams, both others, and against bloodspitting
and giddiness...; and that, when I had an inclination to philosophy,
I did not fall into the hands of any sophist, and that I did not waste
my time on writers of histories, or in the resolution of syllogisms,
or occupy myself about the investigation of appearances in the heavens;
for all these things require the help of the gods and fortune.

Among the Quadi at the Granua. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK TWO

Begin the morning by saying to thyself, I shall meet with the busy-body,
the ungrateful, arrogant, deceitful, envious, unsocial. All these
things happen to them by reason of their ignorance of what is good
and evil. But I who have seen the nature of the good that it is beautiful,
and of the bad that it is ugly, and the nature of him who does wrong,
that it is akin to me, not only of the same blood or seed, but that
it participates in the same intelligence and the same portion of the
divinity, I can neither be injured by any of them, for no one can
fix on me what is ugly, nor can I be angry with my kinsman, nor hate
him, For we are made for co-operation, like feet, like hands, like
eyelids, like the rows of the upper and lower teeth. To act against
one another then is contrary to nature; and it is acting against one
another to be vexed and to turn away. 

Whatever this is that I am, it is a little flesh and breath, and the
ruling part. Throw away thy books; no longer distract thyself: it
is not allowed; but as if thou wast now dying, despise the flesh;
it is blood and bones and a network, a contexture of nerves, veins,
and arteries. See the breath also, what kind of a thing it is, air,
and not always the same, but every moment sent out and again sucked
in. The third then is the ruling part: consider thus: Thou art an
old man; no longer let this be a slave, no longer be pulled by the
strings like a puppet to unsocial movements, no longer either be dissatisfied
with thy present lot, or shrink from the future. 

All that is from the gods is full of Providence. That which is from
fortune is not separated from nature or without an interweaving and
involution with the things which are ordered by Providence. From thence
all things flow; and there is besides necessity, and that which is
for the advantage of the whole universe, of which thou art a part.
But that is good for every part of nature which the nature of the
whole brings, and what serves to maintain this nature. Now the universe
is preserved, as by the changes of the elements so by the changes
of things compounded of the elements. Let these principles be enough
for thee, let them always be fixed opinions. But cast away the thirst
after books, that thou mayest not die murmuring, but cheerfully, truly,
and from thy heart thankful to the gods. 

Remember how long thou hast been putting off these things, and how
often thou hast received an opportunity from the gods, and yet dost
not use it. Thou must now at last perceive of what universe thou art
a part, and of what administrator of the universe thy existence is
an efflux, and that a limit of time is fixed for thee, which if thou
dost not use for clearing away the clouds from thy mind, it will go
and thou wilt go, and it will never return. 

Every moment think steadily as a Roman and a man to do what thou hast
in hand with perfect and simple dignity, and feeling of affection,
and freedom, and justice; and to give thyself relief from all other
thoughts. And thou wilt give thyself relief, if thou doest every act
of thy life as if it were the last, laying aside all carelessness
and passionate aversion from the commands of reason, and all hypocrisy,
and self-love, and discontent with the portion which has been given
to thee. Thou seest how few the things are, the which if a man lays
hold of, he is able to live a life which flows in quiet, and is like
the existence of the gods; for the gods on their part will require
nothing more from him who observes these things. 

Do wrong to thyself, do wrong to thyself, my soul; but thou wilt no
longer have the opportunity of honouring thyself. Every man's life
is sufficient. But thine is nearly finished, though thy soul reverences
not itself but places thy felicity in the souls of others.

Do the things external which fall upon thee distract thee? Give thyself
time to learn something new and good, and cease to be whirled around.
But then thou must also avoid being carried about the other way. For
those too are triflers who have wearied themselves in life by their
activity, and yet have no object to which to direct every movement,
and, in a word, all their thoughts. 

Through not observing what is in the mind of another a man has seldom
been seen to be unhappy; but those who do not observe the movements
of their own minds must of necessity be unhappy. 

This thou must always bear in mind, what is the nature of the whole,
and what is my nature, and how this is related to that, and what kind
of a part it is of what kind of a whole; and that there is no one
who hinders thee from always doing and saying the things which are
according to the nature of which thou art a part. 

Theophrastus, in his comparison of bad acts- such a comparison as
one would make in accordance with the common notions of mankind- says,
like a true philosopher, that the offences which are committed through
desire are more blameable than those which are committed through anger.
For he who is excited by anger seems to turn away from reason with
a certain pain and unconscious contraction; but he who offends through
desire, being overpowered by pleasure, seems to be in a manner more
intemperate and more womanish in his offences. Rightly then, and in
a way worthy of philosophy, he said that the offence which is committed
with pleasure is more blameable than that which is committed with
pain; and on the whole the one is more like a person who has been
first wronged and through pain is compelled to be angry; but the other
is moved by his own impulse to do wrong, being carried towards doing
something by desire. 

Since it is possible that thou mayest depart from life this very moment,
regulate every act and thought accordingly. But to go away from among
men, if there are gods, is not a thing to be afraid of, for the gods
will not involve thee in evil; but if indeed they do not exist, or
if they have no concern about human affairs, what is it to me to live
in a universe devoid of gods or devoid of Providence? But in truth
they do exist, and they do care for human things, and they have put
all the means in man's power to enable him not to fall into real evils.
And as to the rest, if there was anything evil, they would have provided
for this also, that it should be altogether in a man's power not to
fall into it. Now that which does not make a man worse, how can it
make a man's life worse? But neither through ignorance, nor having
the knowledge, but not the power to guard against or correct these
things, is it possible that the nature of the universe has overlooked
them; nor is it possible that it has made so great a mistake, either
through want of power or want of skill, that good and evil should
happen indiscriminately to the good and the bad. But death certainly,
and life, honour and dishonour, pain and pleasure, all these things
equally happen to good men and bad, being things which make us neither
better nor worse. Therefore they are neither good nor evil.

How quickly all things disappear, in the universe the bodies themselves,
but in time the remembrance of them; what is the nature of all sensible
things, and particularly those which attract with the bait of pleasure
or terrify by pain, or are noised abroad by vapoury fame; how worthless,
and contemptible, and sordid, and perishable, and dead they are- all
this it is the part of the intellectual faculty to observe. To observe
too who these are whose opinions and voices give reputation; what
death is, and the fact that, if a man looks at it in itself, and by
the abstractive power of reflection resolves into their parts all
the things which present themselves to the imagination in it, he will
then consider it to be nothing else than an operation of nature; and
if any one is afraid of an operation of nature, he is a child. This,
however, is not only an operation of nature, but it is also a thing
which conduces to the purposes of nature. To observe too how man comes
near to the deity, and by what part of him, and when this part of
man is so disposed. 

Nothing is more wretched than a man who traverses everything in a
round, and pries into the things beneath the earth, as the poet says,
and seeks by conjecture what is in the minds of his neighbours, without
perceiving that it is sufficient to attend to the daemon within him,
and to reverence it sincerely. And reverence of the daemon consists
in keeping it pure from passion and thoughtlessness, and dissatisfaction
with what comes from gods and men. For the things from the gods merit
veneration for their excellence; and the things from men should be
dear to us by reason of kinship; and sometimes even, in a manner,
they move our pity by reason of men's ignorance of good and bad; this
defect being not less than that which deprives us of the power of
distinguishing things that are white and black. 

Though thou shouldst be going to live three thousand years, and as
many times ten thousand years, still remember that no man loses any
other life than this which he now lives, nor lives any other than
this which he now loses. The longest and shortest are thus brought
to the same. For the present is the same to all, though that which
perishes is not the same; and so that which is lost appears to be
a mere moment. For a man cannot lose either the past or the future:
for what a man has not, how can any one take this from him? These
two things then thou must bear in mind; the one, that all things from
eternity are of like forms and come round in a circle, and that it
makes no difference whether a man shall see the same things during
a hundred years or two hundred, or an infinite time; and the second,
that the longest liver and he who will die soonest lose just the same.
For the present is the only thing of which a man can be deprived,
if it is true that this is the only thing which he has, and that a
man cannot lose a thing if he has it not. 

Remember that all is opinion. For what was said by the Cynic Monimus
is manifest: and manifest too is the use of what was said, if a man
receives what may be got out of it as far as it is true.

The soul of man does violence to itself, first of all, when it becomes
an abscess and, as it were, a tumour on the universe, so far as it
can. For to be vexed at anything which happens is a separation of
ourselves from nature, in some part of which the natures of all other
things are contained. In the next place, the soul does violence to
itself when it turns away from any man, or even moves towards him
with the intention of injuring, such as are the souls of those who
are angry. In the third place, the soul does violence to itself when
it is overpowered by pleasure or by pain. Fourthly, when it plays
a part, and does or says anything insincerely and untruly. Fifthly,
when it allows any act of its own and any movement to be without an
aim, and does anything thoughtlessly and without considering what
it is, it being right that even the smallest things be done with reference
to an end; and the end of rational animals is to follow the reason
and the law of the most ancient city and polity. 

Of human life the time is a point, and the substance is in a flux,
and the perception dull, and the composition of the whole body subject
to putrefaction, and the soul a whirl, and fortune hard to divine,
and fame a thing devoid of judgement. And, to say all in a word, everything
which belongs to the body is a stream, and what belongs to the soul
is a dream and vapour, and life is a warfare and a stranger's sojourn,
and after-fame is oblivion. What then is that which is able to conduct
a man? One thing and only one, philosophy. But this consists in keeping
the daemon within a man free from violence and unharmed, superior
to pains and pleasures, doing nothing without purpose, nor yet falsely
and with hypocrisy, not feeling the need of another man's doing or
not doing anything; and besides, accepting all that happens, and all
that is allotted, as coming from thence, wherever it is, from whence
he himself came; and, finally, waiting for death with a cheerful mind,
as being nothing else than a dissolution of the elements of which
every living being is compounded. But if there is no harm to the elements
themselves in each continually changing into another, why should a
man have any apprehension about the change and dissolution of all
the elements? For it is according to nature, and nothing is evil which
is according to nature. 

This in Carnuntum. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK THREE

We ught to consider not only that our life is daily wasting away
and a smaller part of it is left, but another thing also must be taken
into the account, that if a man should live longer, it is quite uncertain
whether the understanding will still continue sufficient for the comprehension
of things, and retain the power of contemplation which strives to
acquire the knowledge of the divine and the human. For if he shall
begin to fall into dotage, perspiration and nutrition and imagination
and appetite, and whatever else there is of the kind, will not fail;
but the power of making use of ourselves, and filling up the measure
of our duty, and clearly separating all appearances, and considering
whether a man should now depart from life, and whatever else of the
kind absolutely requires a disciplined reason, all this is already
extinguished. We must make haste then, not only because we are daily
nearer to death, but also because the conception of things and the
understanding of them cease first. 

We ought to observe also that even the things which follow after the
things which are produced according to nature contain something pleasing
and attractive. For instance, when bread is baked some parts are split
at the surface, and these parts which thus open, and have a certain
fashion contrary to the purpose of the baker's art, are beautiful
in a manner, and in a peculiar way excite a desire for eating. And
again, figs, when they are quite ripe, gape open; and in the ripe
olives the very circumstance of their being near to rottenness adds
a peculiar beauty to the fruit. And the ears of corn bending down,
and the lion's eyebrows, and the foam which flows from the mouth of
wild boars, and many other things- though they are far from being
beautiful, if a man should examine them severally- still, because
they are consequent upon the things which are formed by nature, help
to adorn them, and they please the mind; so that if a man should have
a feeling and deeper insight with respect to the things which are
produced in the universe, there is hardly one of those which follow
by way of consequence which will not seem to him to be in a manner
disposed so as to give pleasure. And so he will see even the real
gaping jaws of wild beasts with no less pleasure than those which
painters and sculptors show by imitation; and in an old woman and
an old man he will be able to see a certain maturity and comeliness;
and the attractive loveliness of young persons he will be able to
look on with chaste eyes; and many such things will present themselves,
not pleasing to every man, but to him only who has become truly familiar
with nature and her works. 

Hippocrates after curing many diseases himself fell sick and died.
The Chaldaei foretold the deaths of many, and then fate caught them
too. Alexander, and Pompeius, and Caius Caesar, after so often completely
destroying whole cities, and in battle cutting to pieces many ten
thousands of cavalry and infantry, themselves too at last departed
from life. Heraclitus, after so many speculations on the conflagration
of the universe, was filled with water internally and died smeared
all over with mud. And lice destroyed Democritus; and other lice killed
Socrates. What means all this? Thou hast embarked, thou hast made
the voyage, thou art come to shore; get out. If indeed to another
life, there is no want of gods, not even there. But if to a state
without sensation, thou wilt cease to be held by pains and pleasures,
and to be a slave to the vessel, which is as much inferior as that
which serves it is superior: for the one is intelligence and deity;
the other is earth and corruption. 

Do not waste the remainder of thy life in thoughts about others, when
thou dost not refer thy thoughts to some object of common utility.
For thou losest the opportunity of doing something else when thou
hast such thoughts as these, What is such a person doing, and why,
and what is he saying, and what is he thinking of, and what is he
contriving, and whatever else of the kind makes us wander away from
the observation of our own ruling power. We ought then to check in
the series of our thoughts everything that is without a purpose and
useless, but most of all the over-curious feeling and the malignant;
and a man should use himself to think of those things only about which
if one should suddenly ask, What hast thou now in thy thoughts? With
perfect openness thou mightest, immediately answer, This or That;
so that from thy words it should be plain that everything in thee
is simple and benevolent, and such as befits a social animal, and
one that cares not for thoughts about pleasure or sensual enjoyments
at all, nor has any rivalry or envy and suspicion, or anything else
for which thou wouldst blush if thou shouldst say that thou hadst
it in thy mind. For the man who is such and no longer delays being
among the number of the best, is like a priest and minister of the
gods, using too the deity which is planted within him, which makes
the man uncontaminated by pleasure, unharmed by any pain, untouched
by any insult, feeling no wrong, a fighter in the noblest fight, one
who cannot be overpowered by any passion, dyed deep with justice,
accepting with all his soul everything which happens and is assigned
to him as his portion; and not often, nor yet without great necessity
and for the general interest, imagining what another says, or does,
or thinks. For it is only what belongs to himself that he makes the
matter for his activity; and he constantly thinks of that which is
allotted to himself out of the sum total of things, and he makes his
own acts fair, and he is persuaded that his own portion is good. For
the lot which is assigned to each man is carried along with him and
carries him along with it. And he remembers also that every rational
animal is his kinsman, and that to care for all men is according to
man's nature; and a man should hold on to the opinion not of all,
but of those only who confessedly live according to nature. But as
to those who live not so, he always bears in mind what kind of men
they are both at home and from home, both by night and by day, and
what they are, and with what men they live an impure life. Accordingly,
he does not value at all the praise which comes from such men, since
they are not even satisfied with themselves. 

Labour not unwillingly, nor without regard to the common interest,
nor without due consideration, nor with distraction; nor let studied
ornament set off thy thoughts, and be not either a man of many words,
or busy about too many things. And further, let the deity which is
in thee be the guardian of a living being, manly and of ripe age,
and engaged in matter political, and a Roman, and a ruler, who has
taken his post like a man waiting for the signal which summons him
from life, and ready to go, having need neither of oath nor of any
man's testimony. Be cheerful also, and seek not external help nor
the tranquility which others give. A man then must stand erect, not
be kept erect by others. 

If thou findest in human life anything better than justice, truth,
temperance, fortitude, and, in a word, anything better than thy own
mind's self-satisfaction in the things which it enables thee to do
according to right reason, and in the condition that is assigned to
thee without thy own choice; if, I say, thou seest anything better
than this, turn to it with all thy soul, and enjoy that which thou
hast found to be the best. But if nothing appears to be better than
the deity which is planted in thee, which has subjected to itself
all thy appetites, and carefully examines all the impressions, and,
as Socrates said, has detached itself from the persuasions of sense,
and has submitted itself to the gods, and cares for mankind; if thou
findest everything else smaller and of less value than this, give
place to nothing else, for if thou dost once diverge and incline to
it, thou wilt no longer without distraction be able to give the preference
to that good thing which is thy proper possession and thy own; for
it is not right that anything of any other kind, such as praise from
the many, or power, or enjoyment of pleasure, should come into competition
with that which is rationally and politically or practically good.
All these things, even though they may seem to adapt themselves to
the better things in a small degree, obtain the superiority all at
once, and carry us away. But do thou, I say, simply and freely choose
the better, and hold to it.- But that which is useful is the better.-
Well then, if it is useful to thee as a rational being, keep to it;
but if it is only useful to thee as an animal, say so, and maintain
thy judgement without arrogance: only take care that thou makest the
inquiry by a sure method. 

Never value anything as profitable to thyself which shall compel thee
to break thy promise, to lose thy self-respect, to hate any man, to
suspect, to curse, to act the hypocrite, to desire anything which
needs walls and curtains: for he who has preferred to everything intelligence
and daemon and the worship of its excellence, acts no tragic part,
does not groan, will not need either solitude or much company; and,
what is chief of all, he will live without either pursuing or flying
from death; but whether for a longer or a shorter time he shall have
the soul inclosed in the body, he cares not at all: for even if he
must depart immediately, he will go as readily as if he were going
to do anything else which can be done with decency and order; taking
care of this only all through life, that his thoughts turn not away
from anything which belongs to an intelligent animal and a member
of a civil community. 

In the mind of one who is chastened and purified thou wilt find no
corrupt matter, nor impurity, nor any sore skinned over. Nor is his
life incomplete when fate overtakes him, as one may say of an actor
who leaves the stage before ending and finishing the play. Besides,
there is in him nothing servile, nor affected, nor too closely bound
to other things, nor yet detached from other things, nothing worthy
of blame, nothing which seeks a hiding-place. 

Reverence the faculty which produces opinion. On this faculty it entirely
depends whether there shall exist in thy ruling part any opinion inconsistent
with nature and the constitution of the rational animal. And this
faculty promises freedom from hasty judgement, and friendship towards
men, and obedience to the gods. 

Throwing away then all things, hold to these only which are few; and
besides bear in mind that every man lives only this present time,
which is an indivisible point, and that all the rest of his life is
either past or it is uncertain. Short then is the time which every
man lives, and small the nook of the earth where he lives; and short
too the longest posthumous fame, and even this only continued by a
succession of poor human beings, who will very soon die, and who know
not even themselves, much less him who died long ago. 

To the aids which have been mentioned let this one still be added:-
Make for thyself a definition or description of the thing which is
presented to thee, so as to see distinctly what kind of a thing it
is in its substance, in its nudity, in its complete entirety, and
tell thyself its proper name, and the names of the things of which
it has been compounded, and into which it will be resolved. For nothing
is so productive of elevation of mind as to be able to examine methodically
and truly every object which is presented to thee in life, and always
to look at things so as to see at the same time what kind of universe
this is, and what kind of use everything performs in it, and what
value everything has with reference to the whole, and what with reference
to man, who is a citizen of the highest city, of which all other cities
are like families; what each thing is, and of what it is composed,
and how long it is the nature of this thing to endure which now makes
an impression on me, and what virtue I have need of with respect to
it, such as gentleness, manliness, truth, fidelity, simplicity, contentment,
and the rest. Wherefore, on every occasion a man should say: this
comes from God; and this is according to the apportionment and spinning
of the thread of destiny, and such-like coincidence and chance; and
this is from one of the same stock, and a kinsman and partner, one
who knows not however what is according to his nature. But I know;
for this reason I behave towards him according to the natural law
of fellowship with benevolence and justice. At the same time however
in things indifferent I attempt to ascertain the value of each.

If thou workest at that which is before thee, following right reason
seriously, vigorously, calmly, without allowing anything else to distract
thee, but keeping thy divine part pure, as if thou shouldst be bound
to give it back immediately; if thou holdest to this, expecting nothing,
fearing nothing, but satisfied with thy present activity according
to nature, and with heroic truth in every word and sound which thou
utterest, thou wilt live happy. And there is no man who is able to
prevent this. 

As physicians have always their instruments and knives ready for cases
which suddenly require their skill, so do thou have principles ready
for the understanding of things divine and human, and for doing everything,
even the smallest, with a recollection of the bond which unites the
divine and human to one another. For neither wilt thou do anything
well which pertains to man without at the same time having a reference
to things divine; nor the contrary. 

No longer wander at hazard; for neither wilt thou read thy own memoirs,
nor the acts of the ancient Romans and Hellenes, and the selections
from books which thou wast reserving for thy old age. Hasten then
to the end which thou hast before thee, and throwing away idle hopes,
come to thy own aid, if thou carest at all for thyself, while it is
in thy power. 

They know not how many things are signified by the words stealing,
sowing, buying, keeping quiet, seeing what ought to be done; for this
is not effected by the eyes, but by another kind of vision.

Body, soul, intelligence: to the body belong sensations, to the soul
appetites, to the intelligence principles. To receive the impressions
of forms by means of appearances belongs even to animals; to be pulled
by the strings of desire belongs both to wild beasts and to men who
have made themselves into women, and to a Phalaris and a Nero: and
to have the intelligence that guides to the things which appear suitable
belongs also to those who do not believe in the gods, and who betray
their country, and do their impure deeds when they have shut the doors.
If then everything else is common to all that I have mentioned, there
remains that which is peculiar to the good man, to be pleased and
content with what happens, and with the thread which is spun for him;
and not to defile the divinity which is planted in his breast, nor
disturb it by a crowd of images, but to preserve it tranquil, following
it obediently as a god, neither saying anything contrary to the truth,
nor doing anything contrary to justice. And if all men refuse to believe
that he lives a simple, modest, and contented life, he is neither
angry with any of them, nor does he deviate from the way which leads
to the end of life, to which a man ought to come pure, tranquil, ready
to depart, and without any compulsion perfectly reconciled to his
lot. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK FOUR

That which rules within, when it is according to nature, is so affected
with respect to the events which happen, that it always easily adapts
itself to that which is and is presented to it. For it requires no
definite material, but it moves towards its purpose, under certain
conditions however; and it makes a material for itself out of that
which opposes it, as fire lays hold of what falls into it, by which
a small light would have been extinguished: but when the fire is strong,
it soon appropriates to itself the matter which is heaped on it, and
consumes it, and rises higher by means of this very material.

Let no act be done without a purpose, nor otherwise than according
to the perfect principles of art. 

Men seek retreats for themselves, houses in the country, sea-shores,
and mountains; and thou too art wont to desire such things very much.
But this is altogether a mark of the most common sort of men, for
it is in thy power whenever thou shalt choose to retire into thyself.
For nowhere either with more quiet or more freedom from trouble does
a man retire than into his own soul, particularly when he has within
him such thoughts that by looking into them he is immediately in perfect
tranquility; and I affirm that tranquility is nothing else than the
good ordering of the mind. Constantly then give to thyself this retreat,
and renew thyself; and let thy principles be brief and fundamental,
which, as soon as thou shalt recur to them, will be sufficient to
cleanse the soul completely, and to send thee back free from all discontent
with the things to which thou returnest. For with what art thou discontented?
With the badness of men? Recall to thy mind this conclusion, that
rational animals exist for one another, and that to endure is a part
of justice, and that men do wrong involuntarily; and consider how
many already, after mutual enmity, suspicion, hatred, and fighting,
have been stretched dead, reduced to ashes; and be quiet at last.-
But perhaps thou art dissatisfied with that which is assigned to thee
out of the universe.- Recall to thy recollection this alternative;
either there is providence or atoms, fortuitous concurrence of things;
or remember the arguments by which it has been proved that the world
is a kind of political community, and be quiet at last.- But perhaps
corporeal things will still fasten upon thee.- Consider then further
that the mind mingles not with the breath, whether moving gently or
violently, when it has once drawn itself apart and discovered its
own power, and think also of all that thou hast heard and assented
to about pain and pleasure, and be quiet at last.- But perhaps the
desire of the thing called fame will torment thee.- See how soon everything
is forgotten, and look at the chaos of infinite time on each side
of the present, and the emptiness of applause, and the changeableness
and want of judgement in those who pretend to give praise, and the
narrowness of the space within which it is circumscribed, and be quiet
at last. For the whole earth is a point, and how small a nook in it
is this thy dwelling, and how few are there in it, and what kind of
people are they who will praise thee. 

This then remains: Remember to retire into this little territory of
thy own, and above all do not distract or strain thyself, but be free,
and look at things as a man, as a human being, as a citizen, as a
mortal. But among the things readiest to thy hand to which thou shalt
turn, let there be these, which are two. One is that things do not
touch the soul, for they are external and remain immovable; but our
perturbations come only from the opinion which is within. The other
is that all these things, which thou seest, change immediately and
will no longer be; and constantly bear in mind how many of these changes
thou hast already witnessed. The universe is transformation: life
is opinion. 

If our intellectual part is common, the reason also, in respect of
which we are rational beings, is common: if this is so, common also
is the reason which commands us what to do, and what not to do; if
this is so, there is a common law also; if this is so, we are fellow-citizens;
if this is so, we are members of some political community; if this
is so, the world is in a manner a state. For of what other common
political community will any one say that the whole human race are
members? And from thence, from this common political community comes
also our very intellectual faculty and reasoning faculty and our capacity
for law; or whence do they come? For as my earthly part is a portion
given to me from certain earth, and that which is watery from another
element, and that which is hot and fiery from some peculiar source
(for nothing comes out of that which is nothing, as nothing also returns
to non-existence), so also the intellectual part comes from some source.

Death is such as generation is, a mystery of nature; a composition
out of the same elements, and a decomposition into the same; and altogether
not a thing of which any man should be ashamed, for it is not contrary
to the nature of a reasonable animal, and not contrary to the reason
of our constitution. 

It is natural that these things should be done by such persons, it
is a matter of necessity; and if a man will not have it so, he will
not allow the fig-tree to have juice. But by all means bear this in
mind, that within a very short time both thou and he will be dead;
and soon not even your names will be left behind. 

Take away thy opinion, and then there is taken away the complaint,
"I have been harmed." Take away the complaint, "I have been harmed,"
and the harm is taken away. 

That which does not make a man worse than he was, also does not make
his life worse, nor does it harm him either from without or from within.

The nature of that which is universally useful has been compelled
to do this. 

Consider that everything which happens, happens justly, and if thou
observest carefully, thou wilt find it to be so. I do not say only
with respect to the continuity of the series of things, but with respect
to what is just, and as if it were done by one who assigns to each
thing its value. Observe then as thou hast begun; and whatever thou
doest, do it in conjunction with this, the being good, and in the
sense in which a man is properly understood to be good. Keep to this
in every action. 

Do not have such an opinion of things as he has who does thee wrong,
or such as he wishes thee to have, but look at them as they are in
truth. 

A man should always have these two rules in readiness; the one, to
do only whatever the reason of the ruling and legislating faculty
may suggest for the use of men; the other, to change thy opinion,
if there is any one at hand who sets thee right and moves thee from
any opinion. But this change of opinion must proceed only from a certain
persuasion, as of what is just or of common advantage, and the like,
not because it appears pleasant or brings reputation. 

Hast thou reason? I have.- Why then dost not thou use it? For if this
does its own work, what else dost thou wish? 

Thou hast existed as a part. Thou shalt disappear in that which produced
thee; but rather thou shalt be received back into its seminal principle
by transmutation. 

Many grains of frankincense on the same altar: one falls before, another
falls after; but it makes no difference. 

Within ten days thou wilt seem a god to those to whom thou art now
a beast and an ape, if thou wilt return to thy principles and the
worship of reason. 

Do not act as if thou wert going to live ten thousand years. Death
hangs over thee. While thou livest, while it is in thy power, be good.

How much trouble he avoids who does not look to see what his neighbour
says or does or thinks, but only to what he does himself, that it
may be just and pure; or as Agathon says, look not round at the depraved
morals of others, but run straight along the line without deviating
from it. 

He who has a vehement desire for posthumous fame does not consider
that every one of those who remember him will himself also die very
soon; then again also they who have succeeded them, until the whole
remembrance shall have been extinguished as it is transmitted through
men who foolishly admire and perish. But suppose that those who will
remember are even immortal, and that the remembrance will be immortal,
what then is this to thee? And I say not what is it to the dead, but
what is it to the living? What is praise except indeed so far as it
has a certain utility? For thou now rejectest unseasonably the gift
of nature, clinging to something else... 

Everything which is in any way beautiful is beautiful in itself, and
terminates in itself, not having praise as part of itself. Neither
worse then nor better is a thing made by being praised. I affirm this
also of the things which are called beautiful by the vulgar, for example,
material things and works of art. That which is really beautiful has
no need of anything; not more than law, not more than truth, not more
than benevolence or modesty. Which of these things is beautiful because
it is praised, or spoiled by being blamed? Is such a thing as an emerald
made worse than it was, if it is not praised? Or gold, ivory, purple,
a lyre, a little knife, a flower, a shrub? 

If souls continue to exist, how does the air contain them from eternity?-
But how does the earth contain the bodies of those who have been buried
from time so remote? For as here the mutation of these bodies after
a certain continuance, whatever it may be, and their dissolution make
room for other dead bodies; so the souls which are removed into the
air after subsisting for some time are transmuted and diffused, and
assume a fiery nature by being received into the seminal intelligence
of the universe, and in this way make room for the fresh souls which
come to dwell there. And this is the answer which a man might give
on the hypothesis of souls continuing to exist. But we must not only
think of the number of bodies which are thus buried, but also of the
number of animals which are daily eaten by us and the other animals.
For what a number is consumed, and thus in a manner buried in the
bodies of those who feed on them! And nevertheless this earth receives
them by reason of the changes of these bodies into blood, and the
transformations into the aerial or the fiery element. 

What is the investigation into the truth in this matter? The division
into that which is material and that which is the cause of form, the
formal. 

Do not be whirled about, but in every movement have respect to justice,
and on the occasion of every impression maintain the faculty of comprehension
or understanding. 

Everything harmonizes with me, which is harmonious to thee, O Universe.
Nothing for me is too early nor too late, which is in due time for
thee. Everything is fruit to me which thy seasons bring, O Nature:
from thee are all things, in thee are all things, to thee all things
return. The poet says, Dear city of Cecrops; and wilt not thou say,
Dear city of Zeus? 

Occupy thyself with few things, says the philosopher, if thou wouldst
be tranquil.- But consider if it would not be better to say, Do what
is necessary, and whatever the reason of the animal which is naturally
social requires, and as it requires. For this brings not only the
tranquility which comes from doing well, but also that which comes
from doing few things. For the greatest part of what we say and do
being unnecessary, if a man takes this away, he will have more leisure
and less uneasiness. Accordingly on every occasion a man should ask
himself, Is this one of the unnecessary things? Now a man should take
away not only unnecessary acts, but also, unnecessary thoughts, for
thus superfluous acts will not follow after. 

Try how the life of the good man suits thee, the life of him who is
satisfied with his portion out of the whole, and satisfied with his
own just acts and benevolent disposition. 

Hast thou seen those things? Look also at these. Do not disturb thyself.
Make thyself all simplicity. Does any one do wrong? It is to himself
that he does the wrong. Has anything happened to thee? Well; out of
the universe from the beginning everything which happens has been
apportioned and spun out to thee. In a word, thy life is short. Thou
must turn to profit the present by the aid of reason and justice.
Be sober in thy relaxation. 

Either it is a well-arranged universe or a chaos huddled together,
but still a universe. But can a certain order subsist in thee, and
disorder in the All? And this too when all things are so separated
and diffused and sympathetic. 

A black character, a womanish character, a stubborn character, bestial,
childish, animal, stupid, counterfeit, scurrilous, fraudulent, tyrannical.

If he is a stranger to the universe who does not know what is in it,
no less is he a stranger who does not know what is going on in it.
He is a runaway, who flies from social reason; he is blind, who shuts
the eyes of the understanding; he is poor, who has need of another,
and has not from himself all things which are useful for life. He
is an abscess on the universe who withdraws and separates himself
from the reason of our common nature through being displeased with
the things which happen, for the same nature produces this, and has
produced thee too: he is a piece rent asunder from the state, who
tears his own soul from that of reasonable animals, which is one.

The one is a philosopher without a tunic, and the other without a
book: here is another half naked: Bread I have not, he says, and I
abide by reason.- And I do not get the means of living out of my learning,
and I abide by my reason. 

Love the art, poor as it may be, which thou hast learned, and be content
with it; and pass through the rest of life like one who has intrusted
to the gods with his whole soul all that he has, making thyself neither
the tyrant nor the slave of any man. 

Consider, for example, the times of Vespasian. Thou wilt see all these
things, people marrying, bringing up children, sick, dying, warring,
feasting, trafficking, cultivating the ground, flattering, obstinately
arrogant, suspecting, plotting, wishing for some to die, grumbling
about the present, loving, heaping up treasure, desiring counsulship,
kingly power. Well then, that life of these people no longer exists
at all. Again, remove to the times of Trajan. Again, all is the same.
Their life too is gone. In like manner view also the other epochs
of time and of whole nations, and see how many after great efforts
soon fell and were resolved into the elements. But chiefly thou shouldst
think of those whom thou hast thyself known distracting themselves
about idle things, neglecting to do what was in accordance with their
proper constitution, and to hold firmly to this and to be content
with it. And herein it is necessary to remember that the attention
given to everything has its proper value and proportion. For thus
thou wilt not be dissatisfied, if thou appliest thyself to smaller
matters no further than is fit. 

The words which were formerly familiar are now antiquated: so also
the names of those who were famed of old, are now in a manner antiquated,
Camillus, Caeso, Volesus, Leonnatus, and a little after also Scipio
and Cato, then Augustus, then also Hadrian and Antoninus. For all
things soon pass away and become a mere tale, and complete oblivion
soon buries them. And I say this of those who have shone in a wondrous
way. For the rest, as soon as they have breathed out their breath,
they are gone, and no man speaks of them. And, to conclude the matter,
what is even an eternal remembrance? A mere nothing. What then is
that about which we ought to employ our serious pains? This one thing,
thoughts just, and acts social, and words which never lie, and a disposition
which gladly accepts all that happens, as necessary, as usual, as
flowing from a principle and source of the same kind. 

Willingly give thyself up to Clotho, one of the Fates, allowing her
to spin thy thread into whatever things she pleases. 

Everything is only for a day, both that which remembers and that which
is remembered. 

Observe constantly that all things take place by change, and accustom
thyself to consider that the nature of the Universe loves nothing
so much as to change the things which are and to make new things like
them. For everything that exists is in a manner the seed of that which
will be. But thou art thinking only of seeds which are cast into the
earth or into a womb: but this is a very vulgar notion. 

Thou wilt soon die, and thou art not yet simple, not free from perturbations,
nor without suspicion of being hurt by external things, nor kindly
disposed towards all; nor dost thou yet place wisdom only in acting
justly. 

Examine men's ruling principles, even those of the wise, what kind
of things they avoid, and what kind they pursue. 

What is evil to thee does not subsist in the ruling principle of another;
nor yet in any turning and mutation of thy corporeal covering. Where
is it then? It is in that part of thee in which subsists the power
of forming opinions about evils. Let this power then not form such
opinions, and all is well. And if that which is nearest to it, the
poor body, is burnt, filled with matter and rottenness, nevertheless
let the part which forms opinions about these things be quiet, that
is, let it judge that nothing is either bad or good which can happen
equally to the bad man and the good. For that which happens equally
to him who lives contrary to nature and to him who lives according
to nature, is neither according to nature nor contrary to nature.

Constantly regard the universe as one living being, having one substance
and one soul; and observe how all things have reference to one perception,
the perception of this one living being; and how all things act with
one movement; and how all things are the cooperating causes of all
things which exist; observe too the continuous spinning of the thread
and the contexture of the web. 

Thou art a little soul bearing about a corpse, as Epictetus used to
say. 

It is no evil for things to undergo change, and no good for things
to subsist in consequence of change. 

Time is like a river made up of the events which happen, and a violent
stream; for as soon as a thing has been seen, it is carried away,
and another comes in its place, and this will be carried away too.

Everything which happens is as familiar and well known as the rose
in spring and the fruit in summer; for such is disease, and death,
and calumny, and treachery, and whatever else delights fools or vexes
them. 

In the series of things those which follow are always aptly fitted
to those which have gone before; for this series is not like a mere
enumeration of disjointed things, which has only a necessary sequence,
but it is a rational connection: and as all existing things are arranged
together harmoniously, so the things which come into existence exhibit
no mere succession, but a certain wonderful relationship.

Always remember the saying of Heraclitus, that the death of earth
is to become water, and the death of water is to become air, and the
death of air is to become fire, and reversely. And think too of him
who forgets whither the way leads, and that men quarrel with that
with which they are most constantly in communion, the reason which
governs the universe; and the things which daily meet with seem to
them strange: and consider that we ought not to act and speak as if
we were asleep, for even in sleep we seem to act and speak; and that
we ought not, like children who learn from their parents, simply to
act and speak as we have been taught. 

If any god told thee that thou shalt die to-morrow, or certainly on
the day after to-morrow, thou wouldst not care much whether it was
on the third day or on the morrow, unless thou wast in the highest
degree mean-spirited- for how small is the difference?- So think it
no great thing to die after as many years as thou canst name rather
than to-morrow. 

Think continually how many physicians are dead after often contracting
their eyebrows over the sick; and how many astrologers after predicting
with great pretensions the deaths of others; and how many philosophers
after endless discourses on death or immortality; how many heroes
after killing thousands; and how many tyrants who have used their
power over men's lives with terrible insolence as if they were immortal;
and how many cities are entirely dead, so to speak, Helice and Pompeii
and Herculaneum, and others innumerable. Add to the reckoning all
whom thou hast known, one after another. One man after burying another
has been laid out dead, and another buries him: and all this in a
short time. To conclude, always observe how ephemeral and worthless
human things are, and what was yesterday a little mucus to-morrow
will be a mummy or ashes. Pass then through this little space of time
conformably to nature, and end thy journey in content, just as an
olive falls off when it is ripe, blessing nature who produced it,
and thanking the tree on which it grew. 

Be like the promontory against which the waves continually break,
but it stands firm and tames the fury of the water around it.

Unhappy am I because this has happened to me.- Not so, but happy am
I, though this has happened to me, because I continue free from pain,
neither crushed by the present nor fearing the future. For such a
thing as this might have happened to every man; but every man would
not have continued free from pain on such an occasion. Why then is
that rather a misfortune than this a good fortune? And dost thou in
all cases call that a man's misfortune, which is not a deviation from
man's nature? And does a thing seem to thee to be a deviation from
man's nature, when it is not contrary to the will of man's nature?
Well, thou knowest the will of nature. Will then this which has happened
prevent thee from being just, magnanimous, temperate, prudent, secure
against inconsiderate opinions and falsehood; will it prevent thee
from having modesty, freedom, and everything else, by the presence
of which man's nature obtains all that is its own? Remember too on
every occasion which leads thee to vexation to apply this principle:
not that this is a misfortune, but that to bear it nobly is good fortune.

It is a vulgar, but still a useful help towards contempt of death,
to pass in review those who have tenaciously stuck to life. What more
then have they gained than those who have died early? Certainly they
lie in their tombs somewhere at last, Cadicianus, Fabius, Julianus,
Lepidus, or any one else like them, who have carried out many to be
buried, and then were carried out themselves. Altogether the interval
is small between birth and death; and consider with how much trouble,
and in company with what sort of people and in what a feeble body
this interval is laboriously passed. Do not then consider life a thing
of any value. For look to the immensity of time behind thee, and to
the time which is before thee, another boundless space. In this infinity
then what is the difference between him who lives three days and him
who lives three generations? 

Always run to the short way; and the short way is the natural: accordingly
say and do everything in conformity with the soundest reason. For
such a purpose frees a man from trouble, and warfare, and all artifice
and ostentatious display. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK FIVE

In he morning when thou risest unwillingly, let this thought be present-
I am rising to the work of a human being. Why then am I dissatisfied
if I am going to do the things for which I exist and for which I was
brought into the world? Or have I been made for this, to lie in the
bed-clothes and keep myself warm?- But this is more pleasant.- Dost
thou exist then to take thy pleasure, and not at all for action or
exertion? Dost thou not see the little plants, the little birds, the
ants, the spiders, the bees working together to put in order their
several parts of the universe? And art thou unwilling to do the work
of a human being, and dost thou not make haste to do that which is
according to thy nature?- But it is necessary to take rest also.-
It is necessary: however nature has fixed bounds to this too: she
has fixed bounds both to eating and drinking, and yet thou goest beyond
these bounds, beyond what is sufficient; yet in thy acts it is not
so, but thou stoppest short of what thou canst do. So thou lovest
not thyself, for if thou didst, thou wouldst love thy nature and her
will. But those who love their several arts exhaust themselves in
working at them unwashed and without food; but thou valuest thy own
own nature less than the turner values the turning art, or the dancer
the dancing art, or the lover of money values his money, or the vainglorious
man his little glory. And such men, when they have a violent affection
to a thing, choose neither to eat nor to sleep rather than to perfect
the things which they care for. But are the acts which concern society
more vile in thy eyes and less worthy of thy labour? 

How easy it is to repel and to wipe away every impression which is
troublesome or unsuitable, and immediately to be in all tranquility.

Judge every word and deed which are according to nature to be fit
for thee; and be not diverted by the blame which follows from any
people nor by their words, but if a thing is good to be done or said,
do not consider it unworthy of thee. For those persons have their
peculiar leading principle and follow their peculiar movement; which
things do not thou regard, but go straight on, following thy own nature
and the common nature; and the way of both is one. 

I go through the things which happen according to nature until I shall
fall and rest, breathing out my breath into that element out of which
I daily draw it in, and falling upon that earth out of which my father
collected the seed, and my mother the blood, and my nurse the milk;
out of which during so many years I have been supplied with food and
drink; which bears me when I tread on it and abuse it for so many
purposes. 

Thou sayest, Men cannot admire the sharpness of thy wits.- Be it so:
but there are many other things of which thou canst not say, I am
not formed for them by nature. Show those qualities then which are
altogether in thy power, sincerity, gravity, endurance of labour,
aversion to pleasure, contentment with thy portion and with few things,
benevolence, frankness, no love of superfluity, freedom from trifling
magnanimity. Dost thou not see how many qualities thou art immediately
able to exhibit, in which there is no excuse of natural incapacity
and unfitness, and yet thou still remainest voluntarily below the
mark? Or art thou compelled through being defectively furnished by
nature to murmur, and to be stingy, and to flatter, and to find fault
with thy poor body, and to try to please men, and to make great display,
and to be so restless in thy mind? No, by the gods: but thou mightest
have been delivered from these things long ago. Only if in truth thou
canst be charged with being rather slow and dull of comprehension,
thou must exert thyself about this also, not neglecting it nor yet
taking pleasure in thy dulness. 

One man, when he has done a service to another, is ready to set it
down to his account as a favour conferred. Another is not ready to
do this, but still in his own mind he thinks of the man as his debtor,
and he knows what he has done. A third in a manner does not even know
what he has done, but he is like a vine which has produced grapes,
and seeks for nothing more after it has once produced its proper fruit.
As a horse when he has run, a dog when he has tracked the game, a
bee when it has made the honey, so a man when he has done a good act,
does not call out for others to come and see, but he goes on to another
act, as a vine goes on to produce again the grapes in season.- Must
a man then be one of these, who in a manner act thus without observing
it?- Yes.- But this very thing is necessary, the observation of what
a man is doing: for, it may be said, it is characteristic of the social
animal to perceive that he is working in a social manner, and indeed
to wish that his social partner also should perceive it.- It is true
what thou sayest, but thou dost not rightly understand what is now
said: and for this reason thou wilt become one of those of whom I
spoke before, for even they are misled by a certain show of reason.
But if thou wilt choose to understand the meaning of what is said,
do not fear that for this reason thou wilt omit any social act.

A prayer of the Athenians: Rain, rain, O dear Zeus, down on the ploughed
fields of the Athenians and on the plains.- In truth we ought not
to pray at all, or we ought to pray in this simple and noble fashion.

Just as we must understand when it is said, That Aesculapius prescribed
to this man horse-exercise, or bathing in cold water or going without
shoes; so we must understand it when it is said, That the nature of
the universe prescribed to this man disease or mutilation or loss
or anything else of the kind. For in the first case Prescribed means
something like this: he prescribed this for this man as a thing adapted
to procure health; and in the second case it means: That which happens
to (or, suits) every man is fixed in a manner for him suitably to
his destiny. For this is what we mean when we say that things are
suitable to us, as the workmen say of squared stones in walls or the
pyramids, that they are suitable, when they fit them to one another
in some kind of connexion. For there is altogether one fitness, harmony.
And as the universe is made up out of all bodies to be such a body
as it is, so out of all existing causes necessity (destiny) is made
up to be such a cause as it is. And even those who are completely
ignorant understand what I mean, for they say, It (necessity, destiny)
brought this to such a person.- This then was brought and this was
precribed to him. Let us then receive these things, as well as those
which Aesculapius prescribes. Many as a matter of course even among
his prescriptions are disagreeable, but we accept them in the hope
of health. Let the perfecting and accomplishment of the things, which
the common nature judges to be good, be judged by thee to be of the
same kind as thy health. And so accept everything which happens, even
if it seem disagreeable, because it leads to this, to the health of
the universe and to the prosperity and felicity of Zeus (the universe).
For he would not have brought on any man what he has brought, if it
were not useful for the whole. Neither does the nature of anything,
whatever it may be, cause anything which is not suitable to that which
is directed by it. For two reasons then it is right to be content
with that which happens to thee; the one, because it was done for
thee and prescribed for thee, and in a manner had reference to thee,
originally from the most ancient causes spun with thy destiny; and
the other, because even that which comes severally to every man is
to the power which administers the universe a cause of felicity and
perfection, nay even of its very continuance. For the integrity of
the whole is mutilated, if thou cuttest off anything whatever from
the conjunction and the continuity either of the parts or of the causes.
And thou dost cut off, as far as it is in thy power, when thou art
dissatisfied, and in a manner triest to put anything out of the way.

Be not disgusted, nor discouraged, nor dissatisfied, if thou dost
not succeed in doing everything according to right principles; but
when thou bast failed, return back again, and be content if the greater
part of what thou doest is consistent with man's nature, and love
this to which thou returnest; and do not return to philosophy as if
she were a master, but act like those who have sore eyes and apply
a bit of sponge and egg, or as another applies a plaster, or drenching
with water. For thus thou wilt not fail to obey reason, and thou wilt
repose in it. And remember that philosophy requires only the things
which thy nature requires; but thou wouldst have something else which
is not according to nature.- It may be objected, Why what is more
agreeable than this which I am doing?- But is not this the very reason
why pleasure deceives us? And consider if magnanimity, freedom, simplicity,
equanimity, piety, are not more agreeable. For what is more agreeable
than wisdom itself, when thou thinkest of the security and the happy
course of all things which depend on the faculty of understanding
and knowledge? 

Things are in such a kind of envelopment that they have seemed to
philosophers, not a few nor those common philosophers, altogether
unintelligible; nay even to the Stoics themselves they seem difficult
to understand. And all our assent is changeable; for where is the
man who never changes? Carry thy thoughts then to the objects themselves,
and consider how short-lived they are and worthless, and that they
may be in the possession of a filthy wretch or a whore or a robber.
Then turn to the morals of those who live with thee, and it is hardly
possible to endure even the most agreeable of them, to say nothing
of a man being hardly able to endure himself. In such darkness then
and dirt and in so constant a flux both of substance and of time,
and of motion and of things moved, what there is worth being highly
prized or even an object of serious pursuit, I cannot imagine. But
on the contrary it is a man's duty to comfort himself, and to wait
for the 

natural dissolution and not to be vexed at the delay, but to rest
in these principles only: the one, that nothing will happen to me
which is not conformable to the nature of the universe; and the other,
that it is in my power never to act contrary to my god and daemon:
for there is no man who will compel me to this. 

About what am I now employing my own soul? On every occasion I must
ask myself this question, and inquire, what have I now in this part
of me which they call the ruling principle? And whose soul have I
now? That of a child, or of a young man, or of a feeble woman, or
of a tyrant, or of a domestic animal, or of a wild beast?

What kind of things those are which appear good to the many, we may
learn even from this. For if any man should conceive certain things
as being really good, such as prudence, temperance, justice, fortitude,
he would not after having first conceived these endure to listen to
anything which should not be in harmony with what is really good.
But if a man has first conceived as good the things which appear to
the many to be good, he will listen and readily receive as very applicable
that which was said by the comic writer. Thus even the many perceive
the difference. For were it not so, this saying would not offend and
would not be rejected in the first case, while we receive it when
it is said of wealth, and of the means which further luxury and fame,
as said fitly and wittily. Go on then and ask if we should value and
think those things to be good, to which after their first conception
in the mind the words of the comic writer might be aptly applied-
that he who has them, through pure abundance has not a place to ease
himself in. 

I am composed of the formal and the material; and neither of them
will perish into non-existence, as neither of them came into existence
out of non-existence. Every part of me then will be reduced by change
into some part of the universe, and that again will change into another
part of the universe, and so on for ever. And by consequence of such
a change I too exist, and those who begot me, and so on for ever in
the other direction. For nothing hinders us from saying so, even if
the universe is administered according to definite periods of revolution.

Reason and the reasoning art (philosophy) are powers which are sufficient
for themselves and for their own works. They move then from a first
principle which is their own, and they make their way to the end which
is proposed to them; and this is the reason why such acts are named
catorthoseis or right acts, which word signifies that they proceed
by the right road. 

None of these things ought to be called a man's, which do not belong
to a man, as man. They are not required of a man, nor does man's nature
promise them, nor are they the means of man's nature attaining its
end. Neither then does the end of man lie in these things, nor yet
that which aids to the accomplishment of this end, and that which
aids towards this end is that which is good. Besides, if any of these
things did belong to man, it would not be right for a man to despise
them and to set himself against them; nor would a man be worthy of
praise who showed that he did not want these things, nor would he
who stinted himself in any of them be good, if indeed these things
were good. But now the more of these things a man deprives himself
of, or of other things like them, or even when he is deprived of any
of them, the more patiently he endures the loss, just in the same
degree he is a better man. 

Such as are thy habitual thoughts, such also will be the character
of thy mind; for the soul is dyed by the thoughts. Dye it then with
a continuous series of such thoughts as these: for instance, that
where a man can live, there he can also live well. But he must live
in a palace;- well then, he can also live well in a palace. And again,
consider that for whatever purpose each thing has been constituted,
for this it has been constituted, and towards this it is carried;
and its end is in that towards which it is carried; and where the
end is, there also is the advantage and the good of each thing. Now
the good for the reasonable animal is society; for that we are made
for society has been shown above. Is it not plain that the inferior
exist for the sake of the superior? But the things which have life
are superior to those which have not life, and of those which have
life the superior are those which have reason. 

To seek what is impossible is madness: and it is impossible that the
bad should not do something of this kind. 

Nothing happens to any man which he is not formed by nature to bear.
The same things happen to another, and either because he does not
see that they have happened or because he would show a great spirit
he is firm and remains unharmed. It is a shame then that ignorance
and conceit should be stronger than wisdom. 

Things themselves touch not the soul, not in the least degree; nor
have they admission to the soul, nor can they turn or move the soul:
but the soul turns and moves itself alone, and whatever judgements
it may think proper to make, such it makes for itself the things which
present themselves to it. 

In one respect man is the nearest thing to me, so far as I must do
good to men and endure them. But so far as some men make themselves
obstacles to my proper acts, man becomes to me one of the things which
are indifferent, no less than the sun or wind or a wild beast. Now
it is true that these may impede my action, but they are no impediments
to my affects and disposition, which have the power of acting conditionally
and changing: for the mind converts and changes every hindrance to
its activity into an aid; and so that which is a hindrance is made
a furtherance to an act; and that which is an obstacle on the road
helps us on this road. 

Reverence that which is best in the universe; and this is that which
makes use of all things and directs all things. And in like manner
also reverence that which is best in thyself; and this is of the same
kind as that. For in thyself also, that which makes use of everything
else, is this, and thy life is directed by this. 

That which does no harm to the state, does no harm to the citizen.
In the case of every appearance of harm apply this rule: if the state
is not harmed by this, neither am I harmed. But if the state is harmed,
thou must not be angry with him who does harm to the state. Show him
where his error is. 

Often think of the rapidity with which things pass by and disappear,
both the things which are and the things which are produced. For substance
is like a river in a continual flow, and the activities of things
are in constant change, and the causes work in infinite varieties;
and there is hardly anything which stands still. And consider this
which is near to thee, this boundless abyss of the past and of the
future in which all things disappear. How then is he not a fool who
is puffed up with such things or plagued about them and makes himself
miserable? for they vex him only for a time, and a short time.

Think of the universal substance, of which thou hast a very small
portion; and of universal time, of which a short and indivisible interval
has been assigned to thee; and of that which is fixed by destiny,
and how small a part of it thou art. 

Does another do me wrong? Let him look to it. He has his own disposition,
his own activity. I now have what the universal nature wills me to
have; and I do what my nature now wills me to do. 

Let the part of thy soul which leads and governs be undisturbed by
the movements in the flesh, whether of pleasure or of pain; and let
it not unite with them, but let it circumscribe itself and limit those
affects to their parts. But when these affects rise up to the mind
by virtue of that other sympathy that naturally exists in a body which
is all one, then thou must not strive to resist the sensation, for
it is natural: but let not the ruling part of itself add to the sensation
the opinion that it is either good or bad. 

Live with the gods. And he does live with the gods who constantly
shows to them, his own soul is satisfied with that which is assigned
to him, and that it does all that the daemon wishes, which Zeus hath
given to every man for his guardian and guide, a portion of himself.
And this is every man's understanding and reason. 

Art thou angry with him whose armpits stink? Art thou angry with him
whose mouth smells foul? What good will this danger do thee? He has
such a mouth, he has such arm-pits: it is necessary that such an emanation
must come from such things- but the man has reason, it will be said,
and he is able, if he takes pain, to discover wherein he offends-
I wish thee well of thy discovery. Well then, and thou hast reason:
by thy rational faculty stir up his rational faculty; show him his
error, admonish him. For if he listens, thou wilt cure him, and there
is no need of anger. Neither tragic actor nor whore... 

As thou intendest to live when thou art gone out,...so it is in thy
power to live here. But if men do not permit thee, then get away out
of life, yet so as if thou wert suffering no harm. The house is smoky,
and I quit it. Why dost thou think that this is any trouble? But so
long as nothing of the kind drives me out, I remain, am free, and
no man shall hinder me from doing what I choose; and I choose to do
what is according to the nature of the rational and social animal.

The intelligence of the universe is social. Accordingly it has made
the inferior things for the sake of the superior, and it has fitted
the superior to one another. Thou seest how it has subordinated, co-ordinated
and assigned to everything its proper portion, and has brought together
into concord with one another the things which are the best.

How hast thou behaved hitherto to the gods, thy parents, brethren,
children, teachers, to those who looked after thy infancy, to thy
friends, kinsfolk, to thy slaves? Consider if thou hast hitherto behaved
to all in such a way that this may be said of thee: 

Never has wronged a man in deed or word. And call to recollection
both how many things thou hast passed through, and how many things
thou hast been able to endure: and that the history of thy life is
now complete and thy service is ended: and how many beautiful things
thou hast seen: and how many pleasures and pains thou hast despised;
and how many things called honourable thou hast spurned; and to how
many ill-minded folks thou hast shown a kind disposition.

Why do unskilled and ignorant souls disturb him who has skill and
knowledge? What soul then has skill and knowledge? That which knows
beginning and end, and knows the reason which pervades all substance
and through all time by fixed periods (revolutions) administers the
universe. 

Soon, very soon, thou wilt be ashes, or a skeleton, and either a name
or not even a name; but name is sound and echo. And the things which
are much valued in life are empty and rotten and trifling, and like
little dogs biting one another, and little children quarrelling, laughing,
and then straightway weeping. But fidelity and modesty and justice
and truth are fled 

Up to Olympus from the wide-spread earth. What then is there which
still detains thee here? If the objects of sense are easily changed
and never stand still, and the organs of perception are dull and easily
receive false impressions; and the poor soul itself is an exhalation
from blood. But to have good repute amidst such a world as this is
an empty thing. Why then dost thou not wait in tranquility for thy
end, whether it is extinction or removal to another state? And until
that time comes, what is sufficient? Why, what else than to venerate
the gods and bless them, and to do good to men, and to practise tolerance
and self-restraint; but as to everything which is beyond the limits
of the poor flesh and breath, to remember that this is neither thine
nor in thy power. 

Thou canst pass thy life in an equable flow of happiness, if thou
canst go by the right way, and think and act in the right way. These
two things are common both to the soul of God and to the soul of man,
and to the soul of every rational being, not to be hindered by another;
and to hold good to consist in the disposition to justice and the
practice of it, and in this to let thy desire find its termination.

If this is neither my own badness, nor an effect of my own badness,
and the common weal is not injured, why am I troubled about it? And
what is the harm to the common weal? 

Do not be carried along inconsiderately by the appearance of things,
but give help to all according to thy ability and their fitness; and
if they should have sustained loss in matters which are indifferent,
do not imagine this to be a damage. For it is a bad habit. But as
the old man, when he went away, asked back his foster-child's top,
remembering that it was a top, so do thou in this case also.

When thou art calling out on the Rostra, hast thou forgotten, man,
what these things are?- Yes; but they are objects of great concern
to these people- wilt thou too then be made a fool for these things?-
I was once a fortunate man, but I lost it, I know not how.- But fortunate
means that a man has assigned to himself a good fortune: and a good
fortune is good disposition of the soul, good emotions, good actions.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK SIX

The substance of the universe is obedient and compliant; and the
reason which governs it has in itself no cause for doing evil, for
it has no malice, nor does it do evil to anything, nor is anything
harmed by it. But all things are made and perfected according to this
reason. 

Let it make no difference to thee whether thou art cold or warm, if
thou art doing thy duty; and whether thou art drowsy or satisfied
with sleep; and whether ill-spoken of or praised; and whether dying
or doing something else. For it is one of the acts of life, this act
by which we die: it is sufficient then in this act also to do well
what we have in hand. 

Look within. Let neither the peculiar quality of anything nor its
value escape thee. 

All existing things soon change, and they will either be reduced to
vapour, if indeed all substance is one, or they will be dispersed.

The reason which governs knows what its own disposition is, and what
it does, and on what material it works. 

The best way of avenging thyself is not to become like the wrong doer.

Take pleasure in one thing and rest in it, in passing from one social
act to another social act, thinking of God. 

The ruling principle is that which rouses and turns itself, and while
it makes itself such as it is and such as it wills to be, it also
makes everything which happens appear to itself to be such as it wills.

In conformity to the nature of the universe every single thing is
accomplished, for certainly it is not in conformity to any other nature
that each thing is accomplished, either a nature which externally
comprehends this, or a nature which is comprehended within this nature,
or a nature external and independent of this. 

The universe is either a confusion, and a mutual involution of things,
and a dispersion; or it is unity and order and providence. If then
it is the former, why do I desire to tarry in a fortuitous combination
of things and such a disorder? And why do I care about anything else
than how I shall at last become earth? And why am I disturbed, for
the dispersion of my elements will happen whatever I do. But if the
other supposition is true, I venerate, and I am firm, and I trust
in him who governs. 

When thou hast been compelled by circumstances to be disturbed in
a manner, quickly return to thyself and do not continue out of tune
longer than the compulsion lasts; for thou wilt have more mastery
over the harmony by continually recurring to it. 

If thou hadst a step-mother and a mother at the same time, thou wouldst
be dutiful to thy step-mother, but still thou wouldst constantly return
to thy mother. Let the court and philosophy now be to thee step-mother
and mother: return to philosophy frequently and repose in her, through
whom what thou meetest with in the court appears to thee tolerable,
and thou appearest tolerable in the court. 

When we have meat before us and such eatables we receive the impression,
that this is the dead body of a fish, and this is the dead body of
a bird or of a pig; and again, that this Falernian is only a little
grape juice, and this purple robe some sheep's wool dyed with the
blood of a shell-fish: such then are these impressions, and they reach
the things themselves and penetrate them, and so we see what kind
of things they are. Just in the same way ought we to act all through
life, and where there are things which appear most worthy of our approbation,
we ought to lay them bare and look at their worthlessness and strip
them of all the words by which they are exalted. For outward show
is a wonderful perverter of the reason, and when thou art most sure
that thou art employed about things worth thy pains, it is then that
it cheats thee most. Consider then what Crates says of Xenocrates
himself. 

Most of the things which the multitude admire are referred to objects
of the most general kind, those which are held together by cohesion
or natural organization, such as stones, wood, fig-trees, vines, olives.
But those which are admired by men who are a little more reasonable
are referred to the things which are held together by a living principle,
as flocks, herds. Those which are admired by men who are still more
instructed are the things which are held together by a rational soul,
not however a universal soul, but rational so far as it is a soul
skilled in some art, or expert in some other way, or simply rational
so far as it possesses a number of slaves. But he who values rational
soul, a soul universal and fitted for political life, regards nothing
else except this; and above all things he keeps his soul in a condition
and in an activity conformable to reason and social life, and he co-operates
to this end with those who are of the same kind as himself.

Some things are hurrying into existence, and others are hurrying out
of it; and of that which is coming into existence part is already
extinguished. Motions and changes are continually renewing the world,
just as the uninterrupted course of time is always renewing the infinite
duration of ages. In this flowing stream then, on which there is no
abiding, what is there of the things which hurry by on which a man
would set a high price? It would be just as if a man should fall in
love with one of the sparrows which fly by, but it has already passed
out of sight. Something of this kind is the very life of every man,
like the exhalation of the blood and the respiration of the air. For
such as it is to have once drawn in the air and to have given it back,
which we do every moment, just the same is it with the whole respiratory
power, which thou didst receive at thy birth yesterday and the day
before, to give it back to the element from which thou didst first
draw it. 

Neither is transpiration, as in plants, a thing to be valued, nor
respiration, as in domesticated animals and wild beasts, nor the receiving
of impressions by the appearances of things, nor being moved by desires
as puppets by strings, nor assembling in herds, nor being nourished
by food; for this is just like the act of separating and parting with
the useless part of our food. What then is worth being valued? To
be received with clapping of hands? No. Neither must we value the
clapping of tongues, for the praise which comes from the many is a
clapping of tongues. Suppose then that thou hast given up this worthless
thing called fame, what remains that is worth valuing? This in my
opinion, to move thyself and to restrain thyself in conformity to
thy proper constitution, to which end both all employments and arts
lead. For every art aims at this, that the thing which has been made
should be adapted to the work for which it has been made; and both
the vine-planter who looks after the vine, and the horse-breaker,
and he who trains the dog, seek this end. But the education and the
teaching of youth aim at something. In this then is the value of the
education and the teaching. And if this is well, thou wilt not seek
anything else. Wilt thou not cease to value many other things too?
Then thou wilt be neither free, nor sufficient for thy own happiness,
nor without passion. For of necessity thou must be envious, jealous,
and suspicious of those who can take away those things, and plot against
those who have that which is valued by thee. Of necessity a man must
be altogether in a state of perturbation who wants any of these things;
and besides, he must often find fault with the gods. But to reverence
and honour thy own mind will make thee content with thyself, and in
harmony with society, and in agreement with the gods, that is, praising
all that they give and have ordered. 

Above, below, all around are the movements of the elements. But the
motion of virtue is in none of these: it is something more divine,
and advancing by a way hardly observed it goes happily on its road.

How strangely men act. They will not praise those who are living at
the same time and living with themselves; but to be themselves praised
by posterity, by those whom they have never seen or ever will see,
this they set much value on. But this is very much the same as if
thou shouldst be grieved because those who have lived before thee
did not praise thee. 

If a thing is difficult to be accomplished by thyself, do not think
that it is impossible for man: but if anything is possible for man
and conformable to his nature, think that this can be attained by
thyself too. 

In the gymnastic exercises suppose that a man has torn thee with his
nails, and by dashing against thy head has inflicted a wound. Well,
we neither show any signs of vexation, nor are we offended, nor do
we suspect him afterwards as a treacherous fellow; and yet we are
on our guard against him, not however as an enemy, nor yet with suspicion,
but we quietly get out of his way. Something like this let thy behaviour
be in all the other parts of life; let us overlook many things in
those who are like antagonists in the gymnasium. For it is in our
power, as I said, to get out of the way, and to have no suspicion
nor hatred. 

If any man is able to convince me and show me that I do not think
or act right, I will gladly change; for I seek the truth by which
no man was ever injured. But he is injured who abides in his error
and ignorance. 

I do my duty: other things trouble me not; for they are either things
without life, or things without reason, or things that have rambled
and know not the way. 

As to the animals which have no reason and generally all things and
objects, do thou, since thou hast reason and they have none, make
use of them with a generous and liberal spirit. But towards human
beings, as they have reason, behave in a social spirit. And on all
occasions call on the gods, and do not perplex thyself about the length
of time in which thou shalt do this; for even three hours so spent
are sufficient. 

Alexander the Macedonian and his groom by death were brought to the
same state; for either they were received among the same seminal principles
of the universe, or they were alike dispersed among the atoms.

Consider how many things in the same indivisible time take place in
each of us, things which concern the body and things which concern
the soul: and so thou wilt not wonder if many more things, or rather
all things which come into existence in that which is the one and
all, which we call Cosmos, exist in it at the same time.

If any man should propose to thee the question, how the name Antoninus
is written, wouldst thou with a straining of the voice utter each
letter? What then if they grow angry, wilt thou be angry too? Wilt
thou not go on with composure and number every letter? just so then
in this life also remember that every duty is made up of certain parts.
These it is thy duty to observe and without being disturbed or showing
anger towards those who are angry with thee to go on thy way and finish
that which is set before thee. 

How cruel it is not to allow men to strive after the things which
appear to them to be suitable to their nature and profitable! And
yet in a manner thou dost not allow them to do this, when thou art
vexed because they do wrong. For they are certainly moved towards
things because they suppose them to be suitable to their nature and
profitable to them.- But it is not so.- Teach them then, and show
them without being angry. 

Death is a cessation of the impressions through the senses, and of
the pulling of the strings which move the appetites, and of the discursive
movements of the thoughts, and of the service to the flesh.

It is a shame for the soul to be first to give way in this life, when
thy body does not give way. 

Take care that thou art not made into a Caesar, that thou art not
dyed with this dye; for such things happen. Keep thyself then simple,
good, pure, serious, free from affectation, a friend of justice, a
worshipper of the gods, kind, affectionate, strenuous in all proper
acts. Strive to continue to be such as philosophy wished to make thee.
Reverence the gods, and help men. Short is life. There is only one
fruit of this terrene life, a pious disposition and social acts. Do
everything as a disciple of Antoninus. Remember his constancy in every
act which was conformable to reason, and his evenness in all things,
and his piety, and the serenity of his countenance, and his sweetness,
and his disregard of empty fame, and his efforts to understand things;
and how he would never let anything pass without having first most
carefully examined it and clearly understood it; and how he bore with
those who blamed him unjustly without blaming them in return; how
he did nothing in a hurry; and how he listened not to calumnies, and
how exact an examiner of manners and actions he was; and not given
to reproach people, nor timid, nor suspicious, nor a sophist; and
with how little he was satisfied, such as lodging, bed, dress, food,
servants; and how laborious and patient; and how he was able on account
of his sparing diet to hold out to the evening, not even requiring
to relieve himself by any evacuations except at the usual hour; and
his firmness and uniformity in his friendships; and how he tolerated
freedom of speech in those who opposed his opinions; and the pleasure
that he had when any man showed him anything better; and how religious
he was without superstition. Imitate all this that thou mayest have
as good a conscience, when thy last hour comes, as he had.

Return to thy sober senses and call thyself back; and when thou hast
roused thyself from sleep and hast perceived that they were only dreams
which troubled thee, now in thy waking hours look at these (the things
about thee) as thou didst look at those (the dreams). 

I consist of a little body and a soul. Now to this little body all
things are indifferent, for it is not able to perceive differences.
But to the understanding those things only are indifferent, which
are not the works of its own activity. But whatever things are the
works of its own activity, all these are in its power. And of these
however only those which are done with reference to the present; for
as to the future and the past activities of the mind, even these are
for the present indifferent. 

Neither the labour which the hand does nor that of the foot is contrary
to nature, so long as the foot does the foot's work and the hand the
hand's. So then neither to a man as a man is his labour contrary to
nature, so long as it does the things of a man. But if the labour
is not contrary to his nature, neither is it an evil to him.

How many pleasures have been enjoyed by robbers, patricides, tyrants.

Dost thou not see how the handicraftsmen accommodate themselves up
to a certain point to those who are not skilled in their craft- nevertheless
they cling to the reason (the principles) of their art and do not
endure to depart from it? Is it not strange if the architect and the
physician shall have more respect to the reason (the principles) of
their own arts than man to his own reason, which is common to him
and the gods? 

Asia, Europe are corners of the universe: all the sea a drop in the
universe; Athos a little clod of the universe: all the present time
is a point in eternity. All things are little, changeable, perishable.
All things come from thence, from that universal ruling power either
directly proceeding or by way of sequence. And accordingly the lion's
gaping jaws, and that which is poisonous, and every harmful thing,
as a thorn, as mud, are after-products of the grand and beautiful.
Do not then imagine that they are of another kind from that which
thou dost venerate, but form a just opinion of the source of all.

He who has seen present things has seen all, both everything which
has taken place from all eternity and everything which will be for
time without end; for all things are of one kin and of one form.

Frequently consider the connexion of all things in the universe and
their relation to one another. For in a manner all things are implicated
with one another, and all in this way are friendly to one another;
for one thing comes in order after another, and this is by virtue
of the active movement and mutual conspiration and the unity of the
substance. 

Adapt thyself to the things with which thy lot has been cast: and
the men among whom thou hast received thy portion, love them, but
do it truly, sincerely. 

Every instrument, tool, vessel, if it does that for which it has been
made, is well, and yet he who made it is not there. But in the things
which are held together by nature there is within and there abides
in them the power which made them; wherefore the more is it fit to
reverence this power, and to think, that, if thou dost live and act
according to its will, everything in thee is in conformity to intelligence.
And thus also in the universe the things which belong to it are in
conformity to intelligence. 

Whatever of the things which are not within thy power thou shalt suppose
to be good for thee or evil, it must of necessity be that, if such
a bad thing befall thee or the loss of such a good thing, thou wilt
blame the gods, and hate men too, those who are the cause of the misfortune
or the loss, or those who are suspected of being likely to be the
cause; and indeed we do much injustice, because we make a difference
between these things. But if we judge only those things which are
in our power to be good or bad, there remains no reason either for
finding fault with God or standing in a hostile attitude to man.

We are all working together to one end, some with knowledge and design,
and others without knowing what they do; as men also when they are
asleep, of whom it is Heraclitus, I think, who says that they are
labourers and co-operators in the things which take place in the universe.
But men co-operate after different fashions: and even those co-operate
abundantly, who find fault with what happens and those who try to
oppose it and to hinder it; for the universe had need even of such
men as these. It remains then for thee to understand among what kind
of workmen thou placest thyself; for he who rules all things will
certainly make a right use of thee, and he will receive thee among
some part of the co-operators and of those whose labours conduce to
one end. But be not thou such a part as the mean and ridiculous verse
in the play, which Chrysippus speaks of. 

Does the sun undertake to do the work of the rain, or Aesculapius
the work of the Fruit-bearer (the earth)? And how is it with respect
to each of the stars, are they not different and yet they work together
to the same end? 

If the gods have determined about me and about the things which must
happen to me, they have determined well, for it is not easy even to
imagine a deity without forethought; and as to doing me harm, why
should they have any desire towards that? For what advantage would
result to them from this or to the whole, which is the special object
of their providence? But if they have not determined about me individually,
they have certainly determined about the whole at least, and the things
which happen by way of sequence in this general arrangement I ought
to accept with pleasure and to be content with them. But if they determine
about nothing- which it is wicked to believe, or if we do believe
it, let us neither sacrifice nor pray nor swear by them nor do anything
else which we do as if the gods were present and lived with us- but
if however the gods determine about none of the things which concern
us, I am able to determine about myself, and I can inquire about that
which is useful; and that is useful to every man which is conformable
to his own constitution and nature. But my nature is rational and
social; and my city and country, so far as I am Antoninus, is Rome,
but so far as I am a man, it is the world. The things then which are
useful to these cities are alone useful to me. Whatever happens to
every man, this is for the interest of the universal: this might be
sufficient. But further thou wilt observe this also as a general truth,
if thou dost observe, that whatever is profitable to any man is profitable
also to other men. But let the word profitable be taken here in the
common sense as said of things of the middle kind, neither good nor
bad. 

As it happens to thee in the amphitheatre and such places, that the
continual sight of the same things and the uniformity make the spectacle
wearisome, so it is in the whole of life; for all things above, below,
are the same and from the same. How long then? 

Think continually that all kinds of men and of all kinds of pursuits
and of all nations are dead, so that thy thoughts come down even to
Philistion and Phoebus and Origanion. Now turn thy thoughts to the
other kinds of men. To that place then we must remove, where there
are so many great orators, and so many noble philosophers, Heraclitus,
Pythagoras, Socrates; so many heroes of former days, and so many generals
after them, and tyrants; besides these, Eudoxus, Hipparchus, Archimedes,
and other men of acute natural talents, great minds, lovers of labour,
versatile, confident, mockers even of the perishable and ephemeral
life of man, as Menippus and such as are like him. As to all these
consider that they have long been in the dust. What harm then is this
to them; and what to those whose names are altogether unknown? One
thing here is worth a great deal, to pass thy life in truth and justice,
with a benevolent disposition even to liars and unjust men.

When thou wishest to delight thyself, think of the virtues of those
who live with thee; for instance, the activity of one, and the modesty
of another, and the liberality of a third, and some other good quality
of a fourth. For nothing delights so much as the examples of the virtues,
when they are exhibited in the morals of those who live with us and
present themselves in abundance, as far as is possible. Wherefore
we must keep them before us. 

Thou art not dissatisfied, I suppose, because thou weighest only so
many litrae and not three hundred. Be not dissatisfied then that thou
must live only so many years and not more; for as thou art satisfied
with the amount of substance which has been assigned to thee, so be
content with the time. 

Let us try to persuade them (men). But act even against their will,
when the principles of justice lead that way. If however any man by
using force stands in thy way, betake thyself to contentment and tranquility,
and at the same time employ the hindrance towards the exercise of
some other virtue; and remember that thy attempt was with a reservation,
that thou didst not desire to do impossibilities. What then didst
thou desire?- Some such effort as this.- But thou attainest thy object,
if the things to which thou wast moved are accomplished.

He who loves fame considers another man's activity to be his own good;
and he who loves pleasure, his own sensations; but he who has understanding,
considers his own acts to be his own good. 

It is in our power to have no opinion about a thing, and not to be
disturbed in our soul; for things themselves have no natural power
to form our judgements. 

Accustom thyself to attend carefully to what is said by another, and
as much as it is possible, be in the speaker's mind. 

That which is not good for the swarm, neither is it good for the bee.

If sailors abused the helmsman or the sick the doctor, would they
listen to anybody else; or how could the helmsman secure the safety
of those in the ship or the doctor the health of those whom he attends?

How many together with whom I came into the world are already gone
out of it. 

To the jaundiced honey tastes bitter, and to those bitten by mad dogs
water causes fear; and to little children the ball is a fine thing.
Why then am I angry? Dost thou think that a false opinion has less
power than the bile in the jaundiced or the poison in him who is bitten
by a mad dog? 

No man will hinder thee from living according to the reason of thy
own nature: nothing will happen to thee contrary to the reason of
the universal nature. 

What kind of people are those whom men wish to please, and for what
objects, and by what kind of acts? How soon will time cover all things,
and how many it has covered already. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK SEVEN

What is badness? It is that which thou hast often seen. And on the
occasion of everything which happens keep this in mind, that it is
that which thou hast often seen. Everywhere up and down thou wilt
find the same things, with which the old histories are filled, those
of the middle ages and those of our own day; with which cities and
houses are filled now. There is nothing new: all things are both familiar
and short-lived. 

How can our principles become dead, unless the impressions (thoughts)
which correspond to them are extinguished? But it is in thy power
continuously to fan these thoughts into a flame. I can have that opinion
about anything, which I ought to have. If I can, why am I disturbed?
The things which are external to my mind have no relation at all to
my mind.- Let this be the state of thy affects, and thou standest
erect. To recover thy life is in thy power. Look at things again as
thou didst use to look at them; for in this consists the recovery
of thy life. 

The idle business of show, plays on the stage, flocks of sheep, herds,
exercises with spears, a bone cast to little dogs, a bit of bread
into fish-ponds, labourings of ants and burden-carrying, runnings
about of frightened little mice, puppets pulled by strings- all alike.
It is thy duty then in the midst of such things to show good humour
and not a proud air; to understand however that every man is worth
just so much as the things are worth about which he busies himself.

In discourse thou must attend to what is said, and in every movement
thou must observe what is doing. And in the one thou shouldst see
immediately to what end it refers, but in the other watch carefully
what is the thing signified. 

Is my understanding sufficient for this or not? If it is sufficient,
I use it for the work as an instrument given by the universal nature.
But if it is not sufficient, then either I retire from the work and
give way to him who is able to do it better, unless there be some
reason why I ought not to do so; or I do it as well as I can, taking
to help me the man who with the aid of my ruling principle can do
what is now fit and useful for the general good. For whatsoever either
by myself or with another I can do, ought to be directed to this only,
to that which is useful and well suited to society. 

How many after being celebrated by fame have been given up to oblivion;
and how many who have celebrated the fame of others have long been
dead. 

Be not ashamed to be helped; for it is thy business to do thy duty
like a soldier in the assault on a town. How then, if being lame thou
canst not mount up on the battlements alone, but with the help of
another it is possible? 

Let not future things disturb thee, for thou wilt come to them, if
it shall be necessary, having with thee the same reason which now
thou usest for present things. 

All things are implicated with one another, and the bond is holy;
and there is hardly anything unconnected with any other thing. For
things have been co-ordinated, and they combine to form the same universe
(order). For there is one universe made up of all things, and one
God who pervades all things, and one substance, and one law, one common
reason in all intelligent animals, and one truth; if indeed there
is also one perfection for all animals which are of the same stock
and participate in the same reason. 

Everything material soon disappears in the substance of the whole;
and everything formal (causal) is very soon taken back into the universal
reason; and the memory of everything is very soon overwhelmed in time.

To the rational animal the same act is according to nature and according
to reason. 

Be thou erect, or be made erect. 
Just as it is with the members in those bodies which are united in
one, so it is with rational beings which exist separate, for they
have been constituted for one co-operation. And the perception of
this will be more apparent to thee, if thou often sayest to thyself
that I am a member (melos) of the system of rational beings. But if
(using the letter r) thou sayest that thou art a part (meros) thou
dost not yet love men from thy heart; beneficence does not yet delight
thee for its own sake; thou still doest it barely as a thing of propriety,
and not yet as doing good to thyself. 

Let there fall externally what will on the parts which can feel the
effects of this fall. For those parts which have felt will complain,
if they choose. But I, unless I think that what has happened is an
evil, am not injured. And it is in my power not to think so.

Whatever any one does or says, I must be good, just as if the gold,
or the emerald, or the purple were always saying this, Whatever any
one does or says, I must be emerald and keep my colour. 

The ruling faculty does not disturb itself; I mean, does not frighten
itself or cause itself pain. But if any one else can frighten or pain
it, let him do so. For the faculty itself will not by its own opinion
turn itself into such ways. Let the body itself take care, if it can,
that is suffer nothing, and let it speak, if it suffers. But the soul
itself, that which is subject to fear, to pain, which has completely
the power of forming an opinion about these things, will suffer nothing,
for it will never deviate into such a judgement. The leading principle
in itself wants nothing, unless it makes a want for itself; and therefore
it is both free from perturbation and unimpeded, if it does not disturb
and impede itself. 

Eudaemonia (happiness) is a good daemon, or a good thing. What then
art thou doing here, O imagination? Go away, I entreat thee by the
gods, as thou didst come, for I want thee not. But thou art come according
to thy old fashion. I am not angry with thee: only go away.

Is any man afraid of change? Why what can take place without change?
What then is more pleasing or more suitable to the universal nature?
And canst thou take a bath unless the wood undergoes a change? And
canst thou be nourished, unless the food undergoes a change? And can
anything else that is useful be accomplished without change? Dost
thou not see then that for thyself also to change is just the same,
and equally necessary for the universal nature? 

Through the universal substance as through a furious torrent all bodies
are carried, being by their nature united with and cooperating with
the whole, as the parts of our body with one another. How many a Chrysippus,
how many a Socrates, how many an Epictetus has time already swallowed
up? And let the same thought occur to thee with reference to every
man and thing. 

One thing only troubles me, lest I should do something which the constitution
of man does not allow, or in the way which it does not allow, or what
it does not allow now. 

Near is thy forgetfulness of all things; and near the forgetfulness
of thee by all. 

It is peculiar to man to love even those who do wrong. And this happens,
if when they do wrong it occurs to thee that they are kinsmen, and
that they do wrong through ignorance and unintentionally, and that
soon both of you will die; and above all, that the wrong-doer has
done thee no harm, for he has not made thy ruling faculty worse than
it was before. 

The universal nature out of the universal substance, as if it were
wax, now moulds a horse, and when it has broken this up, it uses the
material for a tree, then for a man, then for something else; and
each of these things subsists for a very short time. But it is no
hardship for the vessel to be broken up, just as there was none in
its being fastened together. 

A scowling look is altogether unnatural; when it is often assumed,
the result is that all comeliness dies away, and at last is so completely
extinguished that it cannot be again lighted up at all. Try to conclude
from this very fact that it is contrary to reason. For if even the
perception of doing wrong shall depart, what reason is there for living
any longer? 

Nature which governs the whole will soon change all things which thou
seest, and out of their substance will make other things, and again
other things from the substance of them, in order that the world may
be ever new. 

When a man has done thee any wrong, immediately consider with what
opinion about good or evil he has done wrong. For when thou hast seen
this, thou wilt pity him, and wilt neither wonder nor be angry. For
either thou thyself thinkest the same thing to be good that he does
or another thing of the same kind. It is thy duty then to pardon him.
But if thou dost not think such things to be good or evil, thou wilt
more readily be well disposed to him who is in error. 

Think not so much of what thou hast not as of what thou hast: but
of the things which thou hast select the best, and then reflect how
eagerly they would have been sought, if thou hadst them not. At the
same time however take care that thou dost not through being so pleased
with them accustom thyself to overvalue them, so as to be disturbed
if ever thou shouldst not have them. 

Retire into thyself. The rational principle which rules has this nature,
that it is content with itself when it does what is just, and so secures
tranquility. 

Wipe out the imagination. Stop the pulling of the strings. Confine
thyself to the present. Understand well what happens either to thee
or to another. Divide and distribute every object into the causal
(formal) and the material. Think of thy last hour. Let the wrong which
is done by a man stay there where the wrong was done. 

Direct thy attention to what is said. Let thy understanding enter
into the things that are doing and the things which do them.

Adorn thyself with simplicity and modesty and with indifference towards
the things which lie between virtue and vice. Love mankind. Follow
God. The poet says that Law rules all.- And it is enough to remember
that Law rules all. 

About death: Whether it is a dispersion, or a resolution into atoms,
or annihilation, it is either extinction or change. 

About pain: The pain which is intolerable carries us off; but that
which lasts a long time is tolerable; and the mind maintains its own
tranquility by retiring into itself, and the ruling faculty is not
made worse. But the parts which are harmed by pain, let them, if they
can, give their opinion about it. 

About fame: Look at the minds of those who seek fame, observe what
they are, and what kind of things they avoid, and what kind of things
they pursue. And consider that as the heaps of sand piled on one another
hide the former sands, so in life the events which go before are soon
covered by those which come after. 

From Plato: The man who has an elevated mind and takes a view of all
time and of all substance, dost thou suppose it possible for him to
think that human life is anything great? it is not possible, he said.-
Such a man then will think that death also is no evil.- Certainly
not. 

From Antisthenes: It is royal to do good and to be abused.

It is a base thing for the countenance to be obedient and to regulate
and compose itself as the mind commands, and for the mind not to be
regulated and composed by itself. 

It is not right to vex ourselves at things, 
For they care nought about it. 

To the immortal gods and us give joy. 

Life must be reaped like the ripe ears of corn: 
One man is born; another dies. 

If gods care not for me and for my children, 
There is a reason for it. 

For the good is with me, and the just. 

No joining others in their wailing, no violent emotion. 

From Plato: But I would make this man a sufficient answer, which is
this: Thou sayest not well, if thou thinkest that a man who is good
for anything at all ought to compute the hazard of life or death,
and should not rather look to this only in all that he does, whether
he is doing what is just or unjust, and the works of a good or a bad
man. 

For thus it is, men of Athens, in truth: wherever a man has placed
himself thinking it the best place for him, or has been placed by
a commander, there in my opinion he ought to stay and to abide the
hazard, taking nothing into the reckoning, either death or anything
else, before the baseness of deserting his post. 

But, my good friend, reflect whether that which is noble and good
is not something different from saving and being saved; for as to
a man living such or such a time, at least one who is really a man,
consider if this is not a thing to be dismissed from the thoughts:
and there must be no love of life: but as to these matters a man must
intrust them to the deity and believe what the women say, that no
man can escape his destiny, the next inquiry being how he may best
live the time that he has to live. 

Look round at the courses of the stars, as if thou wert going along
with them; and constantly consider the changes of the elements into
one another; for such thoughts purge away the filth of the terrene
life. 

This is a fine saying of Plato: That he who is discoursing about men
should look also at earthly things as if he viewed them from some
higher place; should look at them in their assemblies, armies, agricultural
labours, marriages, treaties, births, deaths, noise of the courts
of justice, desert places, various nations of barbarians, feasts,
lamentations, markets, a mixture of all things and an orderly combination
of contraries. 

Consider the past; such great changes of political supremacies. Thou
mayest foresee also the things which will be. For they will certainly
be of like form, and it is not possible that they should deviate from
the order of the things which take place now: accordingly to have
contemplated human life for forty years is the same as to have contemplated
it for ten thousand years. For what more wilt thou see? 

That which has grown from the earth to the earth, 
But that which has sprung from heavenly seed, 
Back to the heavenly realms returns. This is either a dissolution
of the mutual involution of the atoms, or a similar dispersion of
the unsentient elements. 

With food and drinks and cunning magic arts 
Turning the channel's course to 'scape from death. 
The breeze which heaven has sent 
We must endure, and toil without complaining. 

Another may be more expert in casting his opponent; but he is not
more social, nor more modest, nor better disciplined to meet all that
happens, nor more considerate with respect to the faults of his neighbours.

Where any work can be done conformably to the reason which is common
to gods and men, there we have nothing to fear: for where we are able
to get profit by means of the activity which is successful and proceeds
according to our constitution, there no harm is to be suspected.

Everywhere and at all times it is in thy power piously to acquiesce
in thy present condition, and to behave justly to those who are about
thee, and to exert thy skill upon thy present thoughts, that nothing
shall steal into them without being well examined. 

Do not look around thee to discover other men's ruling principles,
but look straight to this, to what nature leads thee, both the universal
nature through the things which happen to thee, and thy own nature
through the acts which must be done by thee. But every being ought
to do that which is according to its constitution; and all other things
have been constituted for the sake of rational beings, just as among
irrational things the inferior for the sake of the superior, but the
rational for the sake of one another. 

The prime principle then in man's constitution is the social. And
the second is not to yield to the persuasions of the body, for it
is the peculiar office of the rational and intelligent motion to circumscribe
itself, and never to be overpowered either by the motion of the senses
or of the appetites, for both are animal; but the intelligent motion
claims superiority and does not permit itself to be overpowered by
the others. And with good reason, for it is formed by nature to use
all of them. The third thing in the rational constitution is freedom
from error and from deception. Let then the ruling principle holding
fast to these things go straight on, and it has what is its own.

Consider thyself to be dead, and to have completed thy life up to
the present time; and live according to nature the remainder which
is allowed thee. 

Love that only which happens to thee and is spun with the thread of
thy destiny. For what is more suitable? 

In everything which happens keep before thy eyes those to whom the
same things happened, and how they were vexed, and treated them as
strange things, and found fault with them: and now where are they?
Nowhere. Why then dost thou too choose to act in the same way? And
why dost thou not leave these agitations which are foreign to nature,
to those who cause them and those who are moved by them? And why art
thou not altogether intent upon the right way of making use of the
things which happen to thee? For then thou wilt use them well, and
they will be a material for thee to work on. Only attend to thyself,
and resolve to be a good man in every act which thou doest: and remember...

Look within. Within is the fountain of good, and it will ever bubble
up, if thou wilt ever dig. 

The body ought to be compact, and to show no irregularity either in
motion or attitude. For what the mind shows in the face by maintaining
in it the expression of intelligence and propriety, that ought to
be required also in the whole body. But all of these things should
be observed without affectation. 

The art of life is more like the wrestler's art than the dancer's,
in respect of this, that it should stand ready and firm to meet onsets
which are sudden and unexpected. 

Constantly observe who those are whose approbation thou wishest to
have, and what ruling principles they possess. For then thou wilt
neither blame those who offend involuntarily, nor wilt thou want their
approbation, if thou lookest to the sources of their opinions and
appetites. 

Every soul, the philosopher says, is involuntarily deprived of truth;
consequently in the same way it is deprived of justice and temperance
and benevolence and everything of the kind. It is most necessary to
bear this constantly in mind, for thus thou wilt be more gentle towards
all. 

In every pain let this thought be present, that there is no dishonour
in it, nor does it make the governing intelligence worse, for it does
not damage the intelligence either so far as the intelligence is rational
or so far as it is social. Indeed in the case of most pains let this
remark of Epicurus aid thee, that pain is neither intolerable nor
everlasting, if thou bearest in mind that it has its limits, and if
thou addest nothing to it in imagination: and remember this too, that
we do not perceive that many things which are disagreeable to us are
the same as pain, such as excessive drowsiness, and the being scorched
by heat, and the having no appetite. When then thou art discontented
about any of these things, say to thyself, that thou art yielding
to pain. 

Take care not to feel towards the inhuman, as they feel towards men.

How do we know if Telauges was not superior in character to Socrates?
For it is not enough that Socrates died a more noble death, and disputed
more skilfully with the sophists, and passed the night in the cold
with more endurance, and that when he was bid to arrest Leon of Salamis,
he considered it more noble to refuse, and that he walked in a swaggering
way in the streets- though as to this fact one may have great doubts
if it was true. But we ought to inquire, what kind of a soul it was
that Socrates possessed, and if he was able to be content with being
just towards men and pious towards the gods, neither idly vexed on
account of men's villainy, nor yet making himself a slave to any man's
ignorance, nor receiving as strange anything that fell to his share
out of the universal, nor enduring it as intolerable, nor allowing
his understanding to sympathize with the affects of the miserable
flesh. 

Nature has not so mingled the intelligence with the composition of
the body, as not to have allowed thee the power of circumscribing
thyself and of bringing under subjection to thyself all that is thy
own; for it is very possible to be a divine man and to be recognised
as such by no one. Always bear this in mind; and another thing too,
that very little indeed is necessary for living a happy life. And
because thou hast despaired of becoming a dialectician and skilled
in the knowledge of nature, do not for this reason renounce the hope
of being both free and modest and social and obedient to God.

It is in thy power to live free from all compulsion in the greatest
tranquility of mind, even if all the world cry out against thee as
much as they choose, and even if wild beasts tear in pieces the members
of this kneaded matter which has grown around thee. For what hinders
the mind in the midst of all this from maintaining itself in tranquility
and in a just judgement of all surrounding things and in a ready use
of the objects which are presented to it, so that the judgement may
say to the thing which falls under its observation: This thou art
in substance (reality), though in men's opinion thou mayest appear
to be of a different kind; and the use shall say to that which falls
under the hand: Thou art the thing that I was seeking; for to me that
which presents itself is always a material for virtue both rational
and political, and in a word, for the exercise of art, which belongs
to man or God. For everything which happens has a relationship either
to God or man, and is neither new nor difficult to handle, but usual
and apt matter to work on. 

The perfection of moral character consists in this, in passing every
day as the last, and in being neither violently excited nor torpid
nor playing the hypocrite. 

The gods who are immortal are not vexed because during so long a time
they must tolerate continually men such as they are and so many of
them bad; and besides this, they also take care of them in all ways.
But thou, who art destined to end so soon, art thou wearied of enduring
the bad, and this too when thou art one of them? 

It is a ridiculous thing for a man not to fly from his own badness,
which is indeed possible, but to fly from other men's badness, which
is impossible. 

Whatever the rational and political (social) faculty finds to be neither
intelligent nor social, it properly judges to be inferior to itself.

When thou hast done a good act and another has received it, why dost
thou look for a third thing besides these, as fools do, either to
have the reputation of having done a good act or to obtain a return?

No man is tired of receiving what is useful. But it is useful to act
according to nature. Do not then be tired of receiving what is useful
by doing it to others. 

The nature of the An moved to make the universe. But now either everything
that takes place comes by way of consequence or continuity; or even
the chief things towards which the ruling power of the universe directs
its own movement are governed by no rational principle. If this is
remembered it will make thee more tranquil in many things.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK EIGHT

This reflection also tends to the removal of the desire of empty
fame, that it is no longer in thy power to have lived the whole of
thy life, or at least thy life from thy youth upwards, like a philosopher;
but both to many others and to thyself it is plain that thou art far
from philosophy. Thou hast fallen into disorder then, so that it is
no longer easy for thee to get the reputation of a philosopher; and
thy plan of life also opposes it. If then thou hast truly seen where
the matter lies, throw away the thought, How thou shalt seem to others,
and be content if thou shalt live the rest of thy life in such wise
as thy nature wills. Observe then what it wills, and let nothing else
distract thee; for thou hast had experience of many wanderings without
having found happiness anywhere, not in syllogisms, nor in wealth,
nor in reputation, nor in enjoyment, nor anywhere. Where is it then?
In doing what man's nature requires. How then shall a man do this?
If he has principles from which come his affects and his acts. What
principles? Those which relate to good and bad: the belief that there
is nothing good for man, which does not make him just, temperate,
manly, free; and that there is nothing bad, which does not do the
contrary to what has been mentioned. 

On the occasion of every act ask thyself, How is this with respect
to me? Shall I repent of it? A little time and I am dead, and all
is gone. What more do I seek, if what I am now doing is work of an
intelligent living being, and a social being, and one who is under
the same law with God? 

Alexander and Gaius and Pompeius, what are they in comparison with
Diogenes and Heraclitus and Socrates? For they were acquainted with
things, and their causes (forms), and their matter, and the ruling
principles of these men were the same. But as to the others, how many
things had they to care for, and to how many things were they slaves?

Consider that men will do the same things nevertheless, even though
thou shouldst burst. 

This is the chief thing: Be not perturbed, for all things are according
to the nature of the universal; and in a little time thou wilt be
nobody and nowhere, like Hadrian and Augustus. In the next place having
fixed thy eyes steadily on thy business look at it, and at the same
time remembering that it is thy duty to be a good man, and what man's
nature demands, do that without turning aside; and speak as it seems
to thee most just, only let it be with a good disposition and with
modesty and without hypocrisy. 

The nature of the universal has this work to do, to remove to that
place the things which are in this, to change them, to take them away
hence, and to carry them there. All things are change, yet we need
not fear anything new. All things are familiar to us; but the distribution
of them still remains the same. 

Every nature is contented with itself when it goes on its way well;
and a rational nature goes on its way well, when in its thoughts it
assents to nothing false or uncertain, and when it directs its movements
to social acts only, and when it confines its desires and aversions
to the things which are in its power, and when it is satisfied with
everything that is assigned to it by the common nature. For of this
common nature every particular nature is a part, as the nature of
the leaf is a part of the nature of the plant; except that in the
plant the nature of the leaf is part of a nature which has not perception
or reason, and is subject to be impeded; but the nature of man is
part of a nature which is not subject to impediments, and is intelligent
and just, since it gives to everything in equal portions and according
to its worth, times, substance, cause (form), activity, and incident.
But examine, not to discover that any one thing compared with any
other single thing is equal in all respects, but by taking all the
parts together of one thing and comparing them with all the parts
together of another. 

Thou hast not leisure or ability to read. But thou hast leisure or
ability to check arrogance: thou hast leisure to be superior to pleasure
and pain: thou hast leisure to be superior to love of fame, and not
to be vexed at stupid and ungrateful people, nay even to care for
them. 

Let no man any longer hear thee finding fault with the court life
or with thy own. 

Repentance is a kind of self-reproof for having neglected something
useful; but that which is good must be something useful, and the perfect
good man should look after it. But no such man would ever repent of
having refused any sensual pleasure. Pleasure then is neither good
nor useful. 

This thing, what is it in itself, in its own constitution? What is
its substance and material? And what its causal nature (or form)?
And what is it doing in the world? And how long does it subsist?

When thou risest from sleep with reluctance, remember that it is according
to thy constitution and according to human nature to perform social
acts, but sleeping is common also to irrational animals. But that
which is according to each individual's nature is also more peculiarly
its own, and more suitable to its nature, and indeed also more agreeable.

Constantly and, if it be possible, on the occasion of every impression
on the soul, apply to it the principles of Physic, of Ethic, and of
Dialectic. 

Whatever man thou meetest with, immediately say to thyself: What opinions
has this man about good and bad? For if with respect to pleasure and
pain and the causes of each, and with respect to fame and ignominy,
death and life, he has such and such opinions, it will seem nothing
wonderful or strange to me, if he does such and such things; and I
shall bear in mind that he is compelled to do so. 

Remember that as it is a shame to be surprised if the fig-tree produces
figs, so it is to be surprised if the world produces such and such
things of which it is productive; and for the physician and the helmsman
it is a shame to be surprised, if a man has a fever, or if the wind
is unfavourable. 

Remember that to change thy opinion and to follow him who corrects
thy error is as consistent with freedom as it is to persist in thy
error. For it is thy own, the activity which is exerted according
to thy own movement and judgement, and indeed according to thy own
understanding too. 

If a thing is in thy own power, why dost thou do it? But if it is
in the power of another, whom dost thou blame? The atoms (chance)
or the gods? Both are foolish. Thou must blame nobody. For if thou
canst, correct that which is the cause; but if thou canst not do this,
correct at least the thing itself; but if thou canst not do even this,
of what use is it to thee to find fault? For nothing should be done
without a purpose. 

That which has died falls not out of the universe. If it stays here,
it also changes here, and is dissolved into its proper parts, which
are elements of the universe and of thyself. And these too change,
and they murmur not. 

Everything exists for some end, a horse, a vine. Why dost thou wonder?
Even the sun will say, I am for some purpose, and the rest of the
gods will say the same. For what purpose then art thou? to enjoy pleasure?
See if common sense allows this. 

Nature has had regard in everything no less to the end than to the
beginning and the continuance, just like the man who throws up a ball.
What good is it then for the ball to be thrown up, or harm for it
to come down, or even to have fallen? And what good is it to the bubble
while it holds together, or what harm when it is burst? The same may
be said of a light also. 

Turn it (the body) inside out, and see what kind of thing it is; and
when it has grown old, what kind of thing it becomes, and when it
is diseased. 

Short-lived are both the praiser and the praised, and the rememberer
and the remembered: and all this in a nook of this part of the world;
and not even here do all agree, no, not any one with himself: and
the whole earth too is a point. 

Attend to the matter which is before thee, whether it is an opinion
or an act or a word. 

Thou sufferest this justly: for thou choosest rather to become good
to-morrow than to be good to-day. 

Am I doing anything? I do it with reference to the good of mankind.
Does anything happen to me? I receive it and refer it to the gods,
and the source of all things, from which all that happens is derived.

Such as bathing appears to thee- oil, sweat, dirt, filthy water, all
things disgusting- so is every part of life and everything.

Lucilla saw Verus die, and then Lucilla died. Secunda saw Maximus
die, and then Secunda died. Epitynchanus saw Diotimus die, and Epitynchanus
died. Antoninus saw Faustina die, and then Antoninus died. Such is
everything. Celer saw Hadrian die, and then Celer died. And those
sharp-witted men, either seers or men inflated with pride, where are
they? For instance the sharp-witted men, Charax and Demetrius the
Platonist and Eudaemon, and any one else like them. All ephemeral,
dead long ago. Some indeed have not been remembered even for a short
time, and others have become the heroes of fables, and again others
have disappeared even from fables. Remember this then, that this little
compound, thyself, must either be dissolved, or thy poor breath must
be extinguished, or be removed and placed elsewhere. 

It is satisfaction to a man to do the proper works of a man. Now it
is a proper work of a man to be benevolent to his own kind, to despise
the movements of the senses, to form a just judgement of plausible
appearances, and to take a survey of the nature of the universe and
of the things which happen in it. 

There are three relations between thee and other things: the one to
the body which surrounds thee; the second to the divine cause from
which all things come to all; and the third to those who live with
thee. 

Pain is either an evil to the body- then let the body say what it
thinks of it- or to the soul; but it is in the power of the soul to
maintain its own serenity and tranquility, and not to think that pain
is an evil. For every judgement and movement and desire and aversion
is within, and no evil ascends so high. 

Wipe out thy imaginations by often saying to thyself: now it is in
my power to let no badness be in this soul, nor desire nor any perturbation
at all; but looking at all things I see what is their nature, and
I use each according to its value.- Remember this power which thou
hast from nature. 

Speak both in the senate and to every man, whoever he may be, appropriately,
not with any affectation: use plain discourse. 

Augustus' court, wife, daughter, descendants, ancestors, sister, Agrippa,
kinsmen, intimates, friends, Areius, Maecenas, physicians and sacrificing
priests- the whole court is dead. Then turn to the rest, not considering
the death of a single man, but of a whole race, as of the Pompeii;
and that which is inscribed on the tombs- The last of his race. Then
consider what trouble those before them have had that they might leave
a successor; and then, that of necessity some one must be the last.
Again here consider the death of a whole race. 

It is thy duty to order thy life well in every single act; and if
every act does its duty, as far as is possible, be content; and no
one is able to hinder thee so that each act shall not do its duty.-
But something external will stand in the way.- Nothing will stand
in the way of thy acting justly and soberly and considerately.- But
perhaps some other active power will be hindered.- Well, but by acquiescing
in the hindrance and by being content to transfer thy efforts to that
which is allowed, another opportunity of action is immediately put
before thee in place of that which was hindered, and one which will
adapt itself to this ordering of which we are speaking. 

Receive wealth or prosperity without arrogance; and be ready to let
it go. 

If thou didst ever see a hand cut off, or a foot, or a head, lying
anywhere apart from the rest of the body, such does a man make himself,
as far as he can, who is not content with what happens, and separates
himself from others, or does anything unsocial. Suppose that thou
hast detached thyself from the natural unity- for thou wast made by
nature a part, but now thou hast cut thyself off- yet here there is
this beautiful provision, that it is in thy power again to unite thyself.
God has allowed this to no other part, after it has been separated
and cut asunder, to come together again. But consider the kindness
by which he has distinguished man, for he has put it in his power
not to be separated at all from the universal; and when he has been
separated, he has allowed him to return and to be united and to resume
his place as a part. 

As the nature of the universal has given to every rational being all
the other powers that it has, so we have received from it this power
also. For as the universal nature converts and fixes in its predestined
place everything which stands in the way and opposes it, and makes
such things a part of itself, so also the rational animal is able
to make every hindrance its own material, and to use it for such purposes
as it may have designed. 

Do not disturb thyself by thinking of the whole of thy life. Let not
thy thoughts at once embrace all the various troubles which thou mayest
expect to befall thee: but on every occasion ask thyself, What is
there in this which is intolerable and past bearing? For thou wilt
be ashamed to confess. In the next place remember that neither the
future nor the past pains thee, but only the present. But this is
reduced to a very little, if thou only circumscribest it, and chidest
thy mind, if it is unable to hold out against even this.

Does Panthea or Pergamus now sit by the tomb of Verus? Does Chaurias
or Diotimus sit by the tomb of Hadrian? That would be ridiculous.
Well, suppose they did sit there, would the dead be conscious of it?
And if the dead were conscious, would they be pleased? And if they
were pleased, would that make them immortal? Was it not in the order
of destiny that these persons too should first become old women and
old men and then die? What then would those do after these were dead?
All this is foul smell and blood in a bag. 

If thou canst see sharp, look and judge wisely, says the philosopher.

In the constitution of the rational animal I see no virtue which is
opposed to justice; but I see a virtue which is opposed to love of
pleasure, and that is temperance. 

If thou takest away thy opinion about that which appears to give thee
pain, thou thyself standest in perfect security.- Who is this self?-
The reason.- But I am not reason.- Be it so. Let then the reason itself
not trouble itself. But if any other part of thee suffers, let it
have its own opinion about itself. 

Hindrance to the perceptions of sense is an evil to the animal nature.
Hindrance to the movements (desires) is equally an evil to the animal
nature. And something else also is equally an impediment and an evil
to the constitution of plants. So then that which is a hindrance to
the intelligence is an evil to the intelligent nature. Apply all these
things then to thyself. Does pain or sensuous pleasure affect thee?
The senses will look to that.- Has any obstacle opposed thee in thy
efforts towards an object? if indeed thou wast making this effort
absolutely (unconditionally, or without any reservation), certainly
this obstacle is an evil to thee considered as a rational animal.
But if thou takest into consideration the usual course of things,
thou hast not yet been injured nor even impeded. The things however
which are proper to the understanding no other man is used to impede,
for neither fire, nor iron, nor tyrant, nor abuse, touches it in any
way. When it has been made a sphere, it continues a sphere.

It is not fit that I should give myself pain, for I have never intentionally
given pain even to another. 

Different things delight different people. But it is my delight to
keep the ruling faculty sound without turning away either from any
man or from any of the things which happen to men, but looking at
and receiving all with welcome eyes and using everything according
to its value. 

See that thou secure this present time to thyself: for those who rather
pursue posthumous fame do consider that the men of after time will
be exactly such as these whom they cannot bear now; and both are mortal.
And what is it in any way to thee if these men of after time utter
this or that sound, or have this or that opinion about thee?

Take me and cast me where thou wilt; for there I shall keep my divine
part tranquil, that is, content, if it can feel and act conformably
to its proper constitution. Is this change of place sufficient reason
why my soul should be unhappy and worse than it was, depressed, expanded,
shrinking, affrighted? And what wilt thou find which is sufficient
reason for this? 

Nothing can happen to any man which is not a human accident, nor to
an ox which is not according to the nature of an ox, nor to a vine
which is not according to the nature of a vine, nor to a stone which
is not proper to a stone. If then there happens to each thing both
what is usual and natural, why shouldst thou complain? For the common
nature brings nothing which may not be borne by thee. 

If thou art pained by any external thing, it is not this thing that
disturbs thee, but thy own judgement about it. And it is in thy power
to wipe out this judgement now. But if anything in thy own disposition
gives thee pain, who hinders thee from correcting thy opinion? And
even if thou art pained because thou art not doing some particular
thing which seems to thee to be right, why dost thou not rather act
than complain?- But some insuperable obstacle is in the way?- Do not
be grieved then, for the cause of its not being done depends not on
thee.- But it is not worth while to live if this cannot be done.-
Take thy departure then from life contentedly, just as he dies who
is in full activity, and well pleased too with the things which are
obstacles. 

Remember that the ruling faculty is invincible, when self-collected
it is satisfied with itself, if it does nothing which it does not
choose to do, even if it resist from mere obstinacy. What then will
it be when it forms a judgement about anything aided by reason and
deliberately? Therefore the mind which is free from passions is a
citadel, for man has nothing more secure to which he can fly for,
refuge and for the future be inexpugnable. He then who has not seen
this is an ignorant man; but he who has seen it and does not fly to
this refuge is unhappy. 

Say nothing more to thyself than what the first appearances report.
Suppose that it has been reported to thee that a certain person speaks
ill of thee. This has been reported; but that thou hast been injured,
that has not been reported. I see that my child is sick. I do see;
but that he is in danger, I do not see. Thus then always abide by
the first appearances, and add nothing thyself from within, and then
nothing happens to thee. Or rather add something, like a man who knows
everything that happens in the world. 

A cucumber is bitter.- Throw it away.- There are briars in the road.-
Turn aside from them.- This is enough. Do not add, And why were such
things made in the world? For thou wilt be ridiculed by a man who
is acquainted with nature, as thou wouldst be ridiculed by a carpenter
and shoemaker if thou didst find fault because thou seest in their
workshop shavings and cuttings from the things which they make. And
yet they have places into which they can throw these shavings and
cuttings, and the universal nature has no external space; but the
wondrous part of her art is that though she has circumscribed herself,
everything within her which appears to decay and to grow old and to
be useless she changes into herself, and again makes other new things
from these very same, so that she requires neither substance from
without nor wants a place into which she may cast that which decays.
She is content then with her own space, and her own matter and her
own art. 

Neither in thy actions be sluggish nor in thy conversation without
method, nor wandering in thy thoughts, nor let there be in thy soul
inward contention nor external effusion, nor in life be so busy as
to have no leisure. 

Suppose that men kill thee, cut thee in pieces, curse thee. What then
can these things do to prevent thy mind from remaining pure, wise,
sober, just? For instance, if a man should stand by a limpid pure
spring, and curse it, the spring never ceases sending up potable water;
and if he should cast clay into it or filth, it will speedily disperse
them and wash them out, and will not be at all polluted. How then
shalt thou possess a perpetual fountain and not a mere well? By forming
thyself hourly to freedom conjoined with contentment, simplicity and
modesty. 

He who does not know what the world is, does not know where he is.
And he who does not know for what purpose the world exists, does not
know who he is, nor what the world is. But he who has failed in any
one of these things could not even say for what purpose he exists
himself. What then dost thou think of him who avoids or seeks the
praise of those who applaud, of men who know not either where they
are or who they are? 

Dost thou wish to be praised by a man who curses himself thrice every
hour? Wouldst thou wish to please a man who does not please himself?
Does a man please himself who repents of nearly everything that he
does? 

No longer let thy breathing only act in concert with the air which
surrounds thee, but let thy intelligence also now be in harmony with
the intelligence which embraces all things. For the intelligent power
is no less diffused in all parts and pervades all things for him who
is willing to draw it to him than the aerial power for him who is
able to respire it. 

Generally, wickedness does no harm at all to the universe; and particularly,
the wickedness of one man does no harm to another. It is only harmful
to him who has it in his power to be released from it, as soon as
he shall choose. 

To my own free will the free will of my neighbour is just as indifferent
as his poor breath and flesh. For though we are made especially for
the sake of one another, still the ruling power of each of us has
its own office, for otherwise my neighbour's wickedness would be my
harm, which God has not willed in order that my unhappiness may not
depend on another. 

The sun appears to be poured down, and in all directions indeed it
is diffused, yet it is not effused. For this diffusion is extension:
Accordingly its rays are called Extensions [aktines] because they
are extended [apo tou ekteinesthai]. But one may judge what kind of
a thing a ray is, if he looks at the sun's light passing through a
narrow opening into a darkened room, for it is extended in a right
line, and as it were is divided when it meets with any solid body
which stands in the way and intercepts the air beyond; but there the
light remains fixed and does not glide or fall off. Such then ought
to be the out-pouring and diffusion of the understanding, and it should
in no way be an effusion, but an extension, and it should make no
violent or impetuous collision with the obstacles which are in its
way; nor yet fall down, but be fixed and enlighten that which receives
it. For a body will deprive itself of the illumination, if it does
not admit it. 

He who fears death either fears the loss of sensation or a different
kind of sensation. But if thou shalt have no sensation, neither wilt
thou feel any harm; and if thou shalt acquire another kind of sensation,
thou wilt be a different kind of living being and thou wilt not cease
to live. 

Men exist for the sake of one another. Teach them then or bear with
them. 

In one way an arrow moves, in another way the mind. The mind indeed,
both when it exercises caution and when it is employed about inquiry,
moves straight onward not the less, and to its object. 

Enter into every man's ruling faculty; and also let every other man
enter into thine. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK NINE

He ho acts unjustly acts impiously. For since the universal nature
has made rational animals for the sake of one another to help one
another according to their deserts, but in no way to injure one another,
he who transgresses her will, is clearly guilty of impiety towards
the highest divinity. And he too who lies is guilty of impiety to
the same divinity; for the universal nature is the nature of things
that are; and things that are have a relation to all things that come
into existence. And further, this universal nature is named truth,
and is the prime cause of all things that are true. He then who lies
intentionally is guilty of impiety inasmuch as he acts unjustly by
deceiving; and he also who lies unintentionally, inasmuch as he is
at variance with the universal nature, and inasmuch as he disturbs
the order by fighting against the nature of the world; for he fights
against it, who is moved of himself to that which is contrary to truth,
for he had received powers from nature through the neglect of which
he is not able now to distinguish falsehood from truth. And indeed
he who pursues pleasure as good, and avoids pain as evil, is guilty
of impiety. For of necessity such a man must often find fault with
the universal nature, alleging that it assigns things to the bad and
the good contrary to their deserts, because frequently the bad are
in the enjoyment of pleasure and possess the things which procure
pleasure, but the good have pain for their share and the things which
cause pain. And further, he who is afraid of pain will sometimes also
be afraid of some of the things which will happen in the world, and
even this is impiety. And he who pursues pleasure will not abstain
from injustice, and this is plainly impiety. Now with respect to the
things towards which the universal nature is equally affected- for
it would not have made both, unless it was equally affected towards
both- towards these they who wish to follow nature should be of the
same mind with it, and equally affected. With respect to pain, then,
and pleasure, or death and life, or honour and dishonour, which the
universal nature employs equally, whoever is not equally affected
is manifestly acting impiously. And I say that the universal nature
employs them equally, instead of saying that they happen alike to
those who are produced in continuous series and to those who come
after them by virtue of a certain original movement of Providence,
according to which it moved from a certain beginning to this ordering
of things, having conceived certain principles of the things which
were to be, and having determined powers productive of beings and
of changes and of such like successions. 

It would be a man's happiest lot to depart from mankind without having
had any taste of lying and hypocrisy and luxury and pride. However
to breathe out one's life when a man has had enough of these things
is the next best voyage, as the saying is. Hast thou determined to
abide with vice, and has not experience yet induced thee to fly from
this pestilence? For the destruction of the understanding is a pestilence,
much more indeed than any such corruption and change of this atmosphere
which surrounds us. For this corruption is a pestilence of animals
so far as they are animals; but the other is a pestilence of men so
far as they are men. 

Do not despise death, but be well content with it, since this too
is one of those things which nature wills. For such as it is to be
young and to grow old, and to increase and to reach maturity, and
to have teeth and beard and grey hairs, and to beget, and to be pregnant
and to bring forth, and all the other natural operations which the
seasons of thy life bring, such also is dissolution. This, then, is
consistent with the character of a reflecting man, to be neither careless
nor impatient nor contemptuous with respect to death, but to wait
for it as one of the operations of nature. As thou now waitest for
the time when the child shall come out of thy wife's womb, so be ready
for the time when thy soul shall fall out of this envelope. But if
thou requirest also a vulgar kind of comfort which shall reach thy
heart, thou wilt be made best reconciled to death by observing the
objects from which thou art going to be removed, and the morals of
those with whom thy soul will no longer be mingled. For it is no way
right to be offended with men, but it is thy duty to care for them
and to bear with them gently; and yet to remember that thy departure
will be not from men who have the same principles as thyself. For
this is the only thing, if there be any, which could draw us the contrary
way and attach us to life, to be permitted to live with those who
have the same principles as ourselves. But now thou seest how great
is the trouble arising from the discordance of those who live together,
so that thou mayest say, Come quick, O death, lest perchance I, too,
should forget myself. 

He who does wrong does wrong against himself. He who acts unjustly
acts unjustly to himself, because he makes himself bad. 

He often acts unjustly who does not do a certain thing; not only he
who does a certain thing. 

Thy present opinion founded on understanding, and thy present conduct
directed to social good, and thy present disposition of contentment
with everything which happens- that is enough. 

Wipe out imagination: check desire: extinguish appetite: keep the
ruling faculty in its own power. 

Among the animals which have not reason one life is distributed; but
among reasonable animals one intelligent soul is distributed: just
as there is one earth of all things which are of an earthy nature,
and we see by one light, and breathe one air, all of us that have
the faculty of vision and all that have life. 

All things which participate in anything which is common to them all
move towards that which is of the same kind with themselves. Everything
which is earthy turns towards the earth, everything which is liquid
flows together, and everything which is of an aerial kind does the
same, so that they require something to keep them asunder, and the
application of force. Fire indeed moves upwards on account of the
elemental fire, but it is so ready to be kindled together with all
the fire which is here, that even every substance which is somewhat
dry, is easily ignited, because there is less mingled with it of that
which is a hindrance to ignition. Accordingly then everything also
which participates in the common intelligent nature moves in like
manner towards that which is of the same kind with itself, or moves
even more. For so much as it is superior in comparison with all other
things, in the same degree also is it more ready to mingle with and
to be fused with that which is akin to it. Accordingly among animals
devoid of reason we find swarms of bees, and herds of cattle, and
the nurture of young birds, and in a manner, loves; for even in animals
there are souls, and that power which brings them together is seen
to exert itself in the superior degree, and in such a way as never
has been observed in plants nor in stones nor in trees. But in rational
animals there are political communities and friendships, and families
and meetings of people; and in wars, treaties and armistices. But
in the things which are still superior, even though they are separated
from one another, unity in a manner exists, as in the stars. Thus
the ascent to the higher degree is able to produce a sympathy even
in things which are separated. See, then, what now takes place. For
only intelligent animals have now forgotten this mutual desire and
inclination, and in them alone the property of flowing together is
not seen. But still though men strive to avoid this union, they are
caught and held by it, for their nature is too strong for them; and
thou wilt see what I say, if thou only observest. Sooner, then, will
one find anything earthy which comes in contact with no earthy thing
than a man altogether separated from other men. 

Both man and God and the universe produce fruit; at the proper seasons
each produces it. But if usage has especially fixed these terms to
the vine and like things, this is nothing. Reason produces fruit both
for all and for itself, and there are produced from it other things
of the same kind as reason itself. 

If thou art able, correct by teaching those who do wrong; but if thou
canst not, remember that indulgence is given to thee for this purpose.
And the gods, too, are indulgent to such persons; and for some purposes
they even help them to get health, wealth, reputation; so kind they
are. And it is in thy power also; or say, who hinders thee?

Labour not as one who is wretched, nor yet as one who would be pitied
or admired: but direct thy will to one thing only, to put thyself
in motion and to check thyself, as the social reason requires.

To-day I have got out of all trouble, or rather I have cast out all
trouble, for it was not outside, but within and in my opinions.

All things are the same, familiar in experience, and ephemeral in
time, and worthless in the matter. Everything now is just as it was
in the time of those whom we have buried. 

Things stand outside of us, themselves by themselves, neither knowing
aught of themselves, nor expressing any judgement. What is it, then,
which does judge about them? The ruling faculty. 

Not in passivity, but in activity lie the evil and the good of the
rational social animal, just as his virtue and his vice lie not in
passivity, but in activity. 

For the stone which has been thrown up it is no evil to come down,
nor indeed any good to have been carried up. 

Penetrate inwards into men's leading principles, and thou wilt see
what judges thou art afraid of, and what kind of judges they are of
themselves. 

All things are changing: and thou thyself art in continuous mutation
and in a manner in continuous destruction, and the whole universe
too. 

It is thy duty to leave another man's wrongful act there where it
is. 

Termination of activity, cessation from movement and opinion, and
in a sense their death, is no evil. Turn thy thoughts now to the consideration
of thy life, thy life as a child, as a youth, thy manhood, thy old
age, for in these also every change was a death. Is this anything
to fear? Turn thy thoughts now to thy life under thy grandfather,
then to thy life under thy mother, then to thy life under thy father;
and as thou findest many other differences and changes and terminations,
ask thyself, Is this anything to fear? In like manner, then, neither
are the termination and cessation and change of thy whole life a thing
to be afraid of. 

Hasten to examine thy own ruling faculty and that of the universe
and that of thy neighbour: thy own that thou mayest make it just:
and that of the universe, that thou mayest remember of what thou art
a part; and that of thy neighbour, that thou mayest know whether he
has acted ignorantly or with knowledge, and that thou mayest also
consider that his ruling faculty is akin to thine. 

As thou thyself art a component part of a social system, so let every
act of thine be a component part of social life. Whatever act of thine
then has no reference either immediately or remotely to a social end,
this tears asunder thy life, and does not allow it to be one, and
it is of the nature of a mutiny, just as when in a popular assembly
a man acting by himself stands apart from the general agreement.

Quarrels of little children and their sports, and poor spirits carrying
about dead bodies, such is everything; and so what is exhibited in
the representation of the mansions of the dead strikes our eyes more
clearly. 

Examine into the quality of the form of an object, and detach it altogether
from its material part, and then contemplate it; then determine the
time, the longest which a thing of this peculiar form is naturally
made to endure. 

Thou hast endured infinite troubles through not being contented with
thy ruling faculty, when it does the things which it is constituted
by nature to do. But enough of this. 

When another blames thee or hates thee, or when men say about thee
anything injurious, approach their poor souls, penetrate within, and
see what kind of men they are. Thou wilt discover that there is no
reason to take any trouble that these men may have this or that opinion
about thee. However thou must be well disposed towards them, for by
nature they are friends. And the gods too aid them in all ways, by
dreams, by signs, towards the attainment of those things on which
they set a value. 

The periodic movements of the universe are the same, up and down from
age to age. And either the universal intelligence puts itself in motion
for every separate effect, and if this is so, be thou content with
that which is the result of its activity; or it puts itself in motion
once, and everything else comes by way of sequence in a manner; or
indivisible elements are the origin of all things.- In a word, if
there is a god, all is well; and if chance rules, do not thou also
be governed by it. 

Soon will the earth cover us all: then the earth, too, will change,
and the things also which result from change will continue to change
for ever, and these again for ever. For if a man reflects on the changes
and transformations which follow one another like wave after wave
and their rapidity, he will despise everything which is perishable.

The universal cause is like a winter torrent: it carries everything
along with it. But how worthless are all these poor people who are
engaged in matters political, and, as they suppose, are playing the
philosopher! All drivellers. Well then, man: do what nature now requires.
Set thyself in motion, if it is in thy power, and do not look about
thee to see if any one will observe it; nor yet expect Plato's Republic:
but be content if the smallest thing goes on well, and consider such
an event to be no small matter. For who can change men's opinions?
And without a change of opinions what else is there than the slavery
of men who groan while they pretend to obey? Come now and tell me
of Alexander and Philip and Demetrius of Phalerum. They themselves
shall judge whether they discovered what the common nature required,
and trained themselves accordingly. But if they acted like tragedy
heroes, no one has condemned me to imitate them. Simple and modest
is the work of philosophy. Draw me not aside to indolence and pride.

Look down from above on the countless herds of men and their countless
solemnities, and the infinitely varied voyagings in storms and calms,
and the differences among those who are born, who live together, and
die. And consider, too, the life lived by others in olden time, and
the life of those who will live after thee, and the life now lived
among barbarous nations, and how many know not even thy name, and
how many will soon forget it, and how they who perhaps now are praising
thee will very soon blame thee, and that neither a posthumous name
is of any value, nor reputation, nor anything else. 

Let there be freedom from perturbations with respect to the things
which come from the external cause; and let there be justice in the
things done by virtue of the internal cause, that is, let there be
movement and action terminating in this, in social acts, for this
is according to thy nature. 

Thou canst remove out of the way many useless things among those which
disturb thee, for they lie entirely in thy opinion; and thou wilt
then gain for thyself ample space by comprehending the whole universe
in thy mind, and by contemplating the eternity of time, and observing
the rapid change of every several thing, how short is the time from
birth to dissolution, and the illimitable time before birth as well
as the equally boundless time after dissolution. 

All that thou seest will quickly perish, and those who have been spectators
of its dissolution will very soon perish too. And he who dies at the
extremest old age will be brought into the same condition with him
who died prematurely. 

What are these men's leading principles, and about what kind of things
are they busy, and for what kind of reasons do they love and honour?
Imagine that thou seest their poor souls laid bare. When they think
that they do harm by their blame or good by their praise, what an
idea! 

Loss is nothing else than change. But the universal nature delights
in change, and in obedience to her all things are now done well, and
from eternity have been done in like form, and will be such to time
without end. What, then, dost thou say? That all things have been
and all things always will be bad, and that no power has ever been
found in so many gods to rectify these things, but the world has been
condemned to be found in never ceasing evil? 

The rottenness of the matter which is the foundation of everything!
Water, dust, bones, filth: or again, marble rocks, the callosities
of the earth; and gold and silver, the sediments; and garments, only
bits of hair; and purple dye, blood; and everything else is of the
same kind. And that which is of the nature of breath is also another
thing of the same kind, changing from this to that. 

Enough of this wretched life and murmuring and apish tricks. Why art
thou disturbed? What is there new in this? What unsettles thee? Is
it the form of the thing? Look at it. Or is it the matter? Look at
it. But besides these there is nothing. Towards the gods, then, now
become at last more simple and better. It is the same whether we examine
these things for a hundred years or three. 

If any man has done wrong, the harm is his own. But perhaps he has
not done wrong. 

Either all things proceed from one intelligent source and come together
as in one body, and the part ought not to find fault with what is
done for the benefit of the whole; or there are only atoms, and nothing
else than mixture and dispersion. Why, then, art thou disturbed? Say
to the ruling faculty, Art thou dead, art thou corrupted, art thou
playing the hypocrite, art thou become a beast, dost thou herd and
feed with the rest? 

Either the gods have no power or they have power. If, then, they have
no power, why dost thou pray to them? But if they have power, why
dost thou not pray for them to give thee the faculty of not fearing
any of the things which thou fearest, or of not desiring any of the
things which thou desirest, or not being pained at anything, rather
than pray that any of these things should not happen or happen? for
certainly if they can co-operate with men, they can co-operate for
these purposes. But perhaps thou wilt say, the gods have placed them
in thy power. Well, then, is it not better to use what is in thy power
like a free man than to desire in a slavish and abject way what is
not in thy power? And who has told thee that the gods do not aid us
even in the things which are in our power? Begin, then, to pray for
such things, and thou wilt see. One man prays thus: How shall I be
able to lie with that woman? Do thou pray thus: How shall I not desire
to lie with her? Another prays thus: How shall I be released from
this? Another prays: How shall I not desire to be released? Another
thus: How shall I not lose my little son? Thou thus: How shall I not
be afraid to lose him? In fine, turn thy prayers this way, and see
what comes. 

Epicurus says, In my sickness my conversation was not about my bodily
sufferings, nor, says he, did I talk on such subjects to those who
visited me; but I continued to discourse on the nature of things as
before, keeping to this main point, how the mind, while participating
in such movements as go on in the poor flesh, shall be free from perturbations
and maintain its proper good. Nor did I, he says, give the physicians
an opportunity of putting on solemn looks, as if they were doing something
great, but my life went on well and happily. Do, then, the same that
he did both in sickness, if thou art sick, and in any other circumstances;
for never to desert philosophy in any events that may befall us, nor
to hold trifling talk either with an ignorant man or with one unacquainted
with nature, is a principle of all schools of philosophy; but to be
intent only on that which thou art now doing and on the instrument
by which thou doest it. 

When thou art offended with any man's shameless conduct, immediately
ask thyself, Is it possible, then, that shameless men should not be
in the world? It is not possible. Do not, then, require what is impossible.
For this man also is one of those shameless men who must of necessity
be in the world. Let the same considerations be present to thy mind
in the case of the knave, and the faithless man, and of every man
who does wrong in any way. For at the same time that thou dost remind
thyself that it is impossible that such kind of men should not exist,
thou wilt become more kindly disposed towards every one individually.
It is useful to perceive this, too, immediately when the occasion
arises, what virtue nature has given to man to oppose to every wrongful
act. For she has given to man, as an antidote against the stupid man,
mildness, and against another kind of man some other power. And in
all cases it is possible for thee to correct by teaching the man who
is gone astray; for every man who errs misses his object and is gone
astray. Besides wherein hast thou been injured? For thou wilt find
that no one among those against whom thou art irritated has done anything
by which thy mind could be made worse; but that which is evil to thee
and harmful has its foundation only in the mind. And what harm is
done or what is there strange, if the man who has not been instructed
does the acts of an uninstructed man? Consider whether thou shouldst
not rather blame thyself, because thou didst not expect such a man
to err in such a way. For thou hadst means given thee by thy reason
to suppose that it was likely that he would commit this error, and
yet thou hast forgotten and art amazed that he has erred. But most
of all when thou blamest a man as faithless or ungrateful, turn to
thyself. For the fault is manifestly thy own, whether thou didst trust
that a man who had such a disposition would keep his promise, or when
conferring thy kindness thou didst not confer it absolutely, nor yet
in such way as to have received from thy very act all the profit.
For what more dost thou want when thou hast done a man a service?
Art thou not content that thou hast done something conformable to
thy nature, and dost thou seek to be paid for it? Just as if the eye
demanded a recompense for seeing, or the feet for walking. For as
these members are formed for a particular purpose, and by working
according to their several constitutions obtain what is their own;
so also as man is formed by nature to acts of benevolence, when he
has done anything benevolent or in any other way conducive to the
common interest, he has acted conformably to his constitution, and
he gets what is his own. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK TEN

Wilt thou, then, my soul, never be good and simple and one and naked,
more manifest than the body which surrounds thee? Wilt thou never
enjoy an affectionate and contented disposition? Wilt thou never be
full and without a want of any kind, longing for nothing more, nor
desiring anything, either animate or inanimate, for the enjoyment
of pleasures? Nor yet desiring time wherein thou shalt have longer
enjoyment, or place, or pleasant climate, or society of men with whom
thou mayest live in harmony? But wilt thou be satisfied with thy present
condition, and pleased with all that is about thee, and wilt thou
convince thyself that thou hast everything and that it comes from
the gods, that everything is well for thee, and will be well whatever
shall please them, and whatever they shall give for the conservation
of the perfect living being, the good and just and beautiful, which
generates and holds together all things, and contains and embraces
all things which are dissolved for the production of other like things?
Wilt thou never be such that thou shalt so dwell in community with
gods and men as neither to find fault with them at all, nor to be
condemned by them? 

Observe what thy nature requires, so far as thou art governed by nature
only: then do it and accept it, if thy nature, so far as thou art
a living being, shall not be made worse by it. 

And next thou must observe what thy nature requires so far as thou
art a living being. And all this thou mayest allow thyself, if thy
nature, so far as thou art a rational animal, shall not be made worse
by it. But the rational animal is consequently also a political (social)
animal. Use these rules, then, and trouble thyself about nothing else.

Everything which happens either happens in such wise as thou art formed
by nature to bear it, or as thou art not formed by nature to bear
it. If, then, it happens to thee in such way as thou art formed by
nature to bear it, do not complain, but bear it as thou art formed
by nature to bear it. But if it happens in such wise as thou art not
formed by nature to bear it, do not complain, for it will perish after
it has consumed thee. Remember, however, that thou art formed by nature
to bear everything, with respect to which it depends on thy own opinion
to make it endurable and tolerable, by thinking that it is either
thy interest or thy duty to do this. 

If a man is mistaken, instruct him kindly and show him his error.
But if thou art not able, blame thyself, or blame not even thyself.

Whatever may happen to thee, it was prepared for thee from all eternity;
and the implication of causes was from eternity spinning the thread
of thy being, and of that which is incident to it. 

Whether the universe is a concourse of atoms, or nature is a system,
let this first be established, that I am a part of the whole which
is governed by nature; next, I am in a manner intimately related to
the parts which are of the same kind with myself. For remembering
this, inasmuch as I am a part, I shall be discontented with none of
the things which are assigned to me out of the whole; for nothing
is injurious to the part, if it is for the advantage of the whole.
For the whole contains nothing which is not for its advantage; and
all natures indeed have this common principle, but the nature of the
universe has this principle besides, that it cannot be compelled even
by any external cause to generate anything harmful to itself. By remembering,
then, that I am a part of such a whole, I shall be content with everything
that happens. And inasmuch as I am in a manner intimately related
to the parts which are of the same kind with myself, I shall do nothing
unsocial, but I shall rather direct myself to the things which are
of the same kind with myself, and I shall turn an my efforts to the
common interest, and divert them from the contrary. Now, if these
things are done so, life must flow on happily, just as thou mayest
observe that the life of a citizen is happy, who continues a course
of action which is advantageous to his fellow-citizens, and is content
with whatever the state may assign to him. 

The parts of the whole, everything, I mean, which is naturally comprehended
in the universe, must of necessity perish; but let this be understood
in this sense, that they must undergo change. But if this is naturally
both an evil and a necessity for the parts, the whole would not continue
to exist in a good condition, the parts being subject to change and
constituted so as to perish in various ways. For whether did nature
herself design to do evil to the things which are parts of herself,
and to make them subject to evil and of necessity fall into evil,
or have such results happened without her knowing it? Both these suppositions,
indeed, are incredible. But if a man should even drop the term Nature
(as an efficient power), and should speak of these things as natural,
even then it would be ridiculous to affirm at the same time that the
parts of the whole are in their nature subject to change, and at the
same time to be surprised or vexed as if something were happening
contrary to nature, particularly as the dissolution of things is into
those things of which each thing is composed. For there is either
a dispersion of the elements out of which everything has been compounded,
or a change from the solid to the earthy and from the airy to the
aerial, so that these parts are taken back into the universal reason,
whether this at certain periods is consumed by fire or renewed by
eternal changes. And do not imagine that the solid and the airy part
belong to thee from the time of generation. For all this received
its accretion only yesterday and the day before, as one may say, from
the food and the air which is inspired. This, then, which has received
the accretion, changes, not that which thy mother brought forth. But
suppose that this which thy mother brought forth implicates thee very
much with that other part, which has the peculiar quality of change,
this is nothing in fact in the way of objection to what is said.

When thou hast assumed these names, good, modest, true, rational,
a man of equanimity, and magnanimous, take care that thou dost not
change these names; and if thou shouldst lose them, quickly return
to them. And remember that the term Rational was intended to signify
a discriminating attention to every several thing and freedom from
negligence; and that Equanimity is the voluntary acceptance of the
things which are assigned to thee by the common nature; and that Magnanimity
is the elevation of the intelligent part above the pleasurable or
painful sensations of the flesh, and above that poor thing called
fame, and death, and all such things. If, then, thou maintainest thyself
in the possession of these names, without desiring to be called by
these names by others, thou wilt be another person and wilt enter
on another life. For to continue to be such as thou hast hitherto
been, and to be tom in pieces and defiled in such a life, is the character
of a very stupid man and one overfond of his life, and like those
half-devoured fighters with wild beasts, who though covered with wounds
and gore, still intreat to be kept to the following day, though they
will be exposed in the same state to the same claws and bites. Therefore
fix thyself in the possession of these few names: and if thou art
able to abide in them, abide as if thou wast removed to certain islands
of the Happy. But if thou shalt perceive that thou fallest out of
them and dost not maintain thy hold, go courageously into some nook
where thou shalt maintain them, or even depart at once from life,
not in passion, but with simplicity and freedom and modesty, after
doing this one laudable thing at least in thy life, to have gone out
of it thus. In order, however, to the remembrance of these names,
it will greatly help thee, if thou rememberest the gods, and that
they wish not to be flattered, but wish all reasonable beings to be
made like themselves; and if thou rememberest that what does the work
of a fig-tree is a fig-tree, and that what does the work of a dog
is a dog, and that what does the work of a bee is a bee, and that
what does the work of a man is a man. 

Mimi, war, astonishment, torpor, slavery, will daily wipe out those
holy principles of thine. How many things without studying nature
dost thou imagine, and how many dost thou neglect? But it is thy duty
so to look on and so to do everything, that at the same time the power
of dealing with circumstances is perfected, and the contemplative
faculty is exercised, and the confidence which comes from the knowledge
of each several thing is maintained without showing it, but yet not
concealed. For when wilt thou enjoy simplicity, when gravity, and
when the knowledge of every several thing, both what it is in substance,
and what place it has in the universe, and how long it is formed to
exist and of what things it is compounded, and to whom it can belong,
and who are able both to give it and take it away? 

A spider is proud when it has caught a fly, and another when he has
caught a poor hare, and another when he has taken a little fish in
a net, and another when he has taken wild boars, and another when
he has taken bears, and another when he has taken Sarmatians. Are
not these robbers, if thou examinest their opinions? 

Acquire the contemplative way of seeing how all things change into
one another, and constantly attend to it, and exercise thyself about
this part of philosophy. For nothing is so much adapted to produce
magnanimity. Such a man has put off the body, and as he sees that
he must, no one knows how soon, go away from among men and leave everything
here, he gives himself up entirely to just doing in all his actions,
and in everything else that happens he resigns himself to the universal
nature. But as to what any man shall say or think about him or do
against him, he never even thinks of it, being himself contented with
these two things, with acting justly in what he now does, and being
satisfied with what is now assigned to him; and he lays aside all
distracting and busy pursuits, and desires nothing else than to accomplish
the straight course through the law, and by accomplishing the straight
course to follow God. 

What need is there of suspicious fear, since it is in thy power to
inquire what ought to be done? And if thou seest clear, go by this
way content, without turning back: but if thou dost not see clear,
stop and take the best advisers. But if any other things oppose thee,
go on according to thy powers with due consideration, keeping to that
which appears to be just. For it is best to reach this object, and
if thou dost fail, let thy failure be in attempting this. He who follows
reason in all things is both tranquil and active at the same time,
and also cheerful and collected. 

Inquire of thyself as soon as thou wakest from sleep, whether it will
make any difference to thee, if another does what is just and right.
It will make no difference. 

Thou hast not forgotten, I suppose, that those who assume arrogant
airs in bestowing their praise or blame on others, are such as they
are at bed and at board, and thou hast not forgotten what they do,
and what they avoid and what they pursue, and how they steal and how
they rob, not with hands and feet, but with their most valuable part,
by means of which there is produced, when a man chooses, fidelity,
modesty, truth, law, a good daemon (happiness)? 

To her who gives and takes back all, to nature, the man who is instructed
and modest says, Give what thou wilt; take back what thou wilt. And
he says this not proudly, but obediently and well pleased with her.

Short is the little which remains to thee of life. Live as on a mountain.
For it makes no difference whether a man lives there or here, if he
lives everywhere in the world as in a state (political community).
Let men see, let them know a real man who lives according to nature.
If they cannot endure him, let them kill him. For that is better than
to live thus as men do. 

No longer talk at all about the kind of man that a good man ought
to be, but be such. 

Constantly contemplate the whole of time and the whole of substance,
and consider that all individual things as to substance are a grain
of a fig, and as to time, the turning of a gimlet. 

Look at everything that exists, and observe that it is already in
dissolution and in change, and as it were putrefaction or dispersion,
or that everything is so constituted by nature as to die.

Consider what men are when they are eating, sleeping, generating,
easing themselves and so forth. Then what kind of men they are when
they are imperious and arrogant, or angry and scolding from their
elevated place. But a short time ago to how many they were slaves
and for what things; and after a little time consider in what a condition
they will be. 

That is for the good of each thing, which the universal nature brings
to each. And it is for its good at the time when nature brings it.

"The earth loves the shower"; and "the solemn aether loves": and the
universe loves to make whatever is about to be. I say then to the
universe, that I love as thou lovest. And is not this too said, that
"this or that loves (is wont) to be produced"? 

Either thou livest here and hast already accustomed thyself to it,
or thou art going away, and this was thy own will; or thou art dying
and hast discharged thy duty. But besides these things there is nothing.
Be of good cheer, then. 

Let this always be plain to thee, that this piece of land is like
any other; and that all things here are the same with things on top
of a mountain, or on the sea-shore, or wherever thou choosest to be.
For thou wilt find just what Plato says, Dwelling within the walls
of a city as in a shepherd's fold on a mountain. 

What is my ruling faculty now to me? And of what nature am I now making
it? And for what purpose am I now using it? Is it void of understanding?
Is it loosed and rent asunder from social life? Is it melted into
and mixed with the poor flesh so as to move together with it?

He who flies from his master is a runaway; but the law is master,
and he who breaks the law is a runaway. And he also who is grieved
or angry or afraid, is dissatisfied because something has been or
is or shall be of the things which are appointed by him who rules
all things, and he is Law, and assigns to every man what is fit. He
then who fears or is grieved or is angry is a runaway. 

A man deposits seed in a womb and goes away, and then another cause
takes it, and labours on it and makes a child. What a thing from such
a material! Again, the child passes food down through the throat,
and then another cause takes it and makes perception and motion, and
in fine life and strength and other things; how many and how strange
I Observe then the things which are produced in such a hidden way,
and see the power just as we see the power which carries things downwards
and upwards, not with the eyes, but still no less plainly.

Constantly consider how all things such as they now are, in time past
also were; and consider that they will be the same again. And place
before thy eyes entire dramas and stages of the same form, whatever
thou hast learned from thy experience or from older history; for example,
the whole court of Hadrian, and the whole court of Antoninus, and
the whole court of Philip, Alexander, Croesus; for all those were
such dramas as we see now, only with different actors. 

Imagine every man who is grieved at anything or discontented to be
like a pig which is sacrificed and kicks and screams. 

Like this pig also is he who on his bed in silence laments the bonds
in which we are held. And consider that only to the rational animal
is it given to follow voluntarily what happens; but simply to follow
is a necessity imposed on all. 

Severally on the occasion of everything that thou doest, pause and
ask thyself, if death is a dreadful thing because it deprives thee
of this. 

When thou art offended at any man's fault, forthwith turn to thyself
and reflect in what like manner thou dost err thyself; for example,
in thinking that money is a good thing, or pleasure, or a bit of reputation,
and the like. For by attending to this thou wilt quickly forget thy
anger, if this consideration also is added, that the man is compelled:
for what else could he do? or, if thou art able, take away from him
the compulsion. 

When thou hast seen Satyron the Socratic, think of either Eutyches
or Hymen, and when thou hast seen Euphrates, think of Eutychion or
Silvanus, and when thou hast seen Alciphron think of Tropaeophorus,
and when thou hast seen Xenophon think of Crito or Severus, and when
thou hast looked on thyself, think of any other Caesar, and in the
case of every one do in like manner. Then let this thought be in thy
mind, Where then are those men? Nowhere, or nobody knows where. For
thus continuously thou wilt look at human things as smoke and nothing
at all; especially if thou reflectest at the same time that what has
once changed will never exist again in the infinite duration of time.
But thou, in what a brief space of time is thy existence? And why
art thou not content to pass through this short time in an orderly
way? What matter and opportunity for thy activity art thou avoiding?
For what else are all these things, except exercises for the reason,
when it has viewed carefully and by examination into their nature
the things which happen in life? Persevere then until thou shalt have
made these things thy own, as the stomach which is strengthened makes
all things its own, as the blazing fire makes flame and brightness
out of everything that is thrown into it. 

Let it not be in any man's power to say truly of thee that thou art
not simple or that thou are not good; but let him be a liar whoever
shall think anything of this kind about thee; and this is altogether
in thy power. For who is he that shall hinder thee from being good
and simple? Do thou only determine to live no longer, unless thou
shalt be such. For neither does reason allow thee to live, if thou
art not such. 

What is that which as to this material (our life) can be done or said
in the way most conformable to reason. For whatever this may be, it
is in thy power to do it or to say it, and do not make excuses that
thou art hindered. Thou wilt not cease to lament till thy mind is
in such a condition that, what luxury is to those who enjoy pleasure,
such shall be to thee, in the matter which is subjected and presented
to thee, the doing of the things which are conformable to man's constitution;
for a man ought to consider as an enjoyment everything which it is
in his power to do according to his own nature. And it is in his power
everywhere. Now, it is not given to a cylinder to move everywhere
by its own motion, nor yet to water nor to fire, nor to anything else
which is governed by nature or an irrational soul, for the things
which check them and stand in the way are many. But intelligence and
reason are able to go through everything that opposes them, and in
such manner as they are formed by nature and as they choose. Place
before thy eyes this facility with which the reason will be carried
through all things, as fire upwards, as a stone downwards, as a cylinder
down an inclined surface, and seek for nothing further. For all other
obstacles either affect the body only which is a dead thing; or, except
through opinion and the yielding of the reason itself, they do not
crush nor do any harm of any kind; for if they did, he who felt it
would immediately become bad. Now, in the case of all things which
have a certain constitution, whatever harm may happen to any of them,
that which is so affected becomes consequently worse; but in the like
case, a man becomes both better, if one may say so, and more worthy
of praise by making a right use of these accidents. And finally remember
that nothing harms him who is really a citizen, which does not harm
the state; nor yet does anything harm the state, which does not harm
law (order); and of these things which are called misfortunes not
one harms law. What then does not harm law does not harm either state
or citizen. 

To him who is penetrated by true principles even the briefest precept
is sufficient, and any common precept, to remind him that he should
be free from grief and fear. For example- 

Leaves, some the wind scatters on the ground- 
So is the race of men. Leaves, also, are thy children; and leaves,
too, are they who cry out as if they were worthy of credit and bestow
their praise, or on the contrary curse, or secretly blame and sneer;
and leaves, in like manner, are those who shall receive and transmit
a man's fame to aftertimes. For all such things as these "are produced
in the season of spring," as the poet says; then the wind casts them
down; then the forest produces other leaves in their places. But a
brief existence is common to all things, and yet thou avoidest and
pursuest all things as if they would be eternal. A little time, and
thou shalt close thy eyes; and him who has attended thee to thy grave
another soon will lament. 

The healthy eye ought to see all visible things and not to say, I
wish for green things; for this is the condition of a diseased eye.
And the healthy hearing and smelling ought to be ready to perceive
all that can be heard and smelled. And the healthy stomach ought to
be with respect to all food just as the mill with respect to all things
which it is formed to grind. And accordingly the healthy understanding
ought to be prepared for everything which happens; but that which
says, Let my dear children live, and let all men praise whatever I
may do, is an eye which seeks for green things, or teeth which seek
for soft things. 

There is no man so fortunate that there shall not be by him when he
is dying some who are pleased with what is going to happen. Suppose
that he was a good and wise man, will there not be at last some one
to say to himself, Let us at last breathe freely being relieved from
this schoolmaster? It is true that he was harsh to none of us, but
I perceived that he tacitly condemns us.- This is what is said of
a good man. But in our own case how many other things are there for
which there are many who wish to get rid of us. Thou wilt consider
this then when thou art dying, and thou wilt depart more contentedly
by reflecting thus: I am going away from such a life, in which even
my associates in behalf of whom I have striven so much, prayed, and
cared, themselves wish me to depart, hoping perchance to get some
little advantage by it. Why then should a man cling to a longer stay
here? Do not however for this reason go away less kindly disposed
to them, but preserving thy own character, and friendly and benevolent
and mild, and on the other hand not as if thou wast torn away; but
as when a man dies a quiet death, the poor soul is easily separated
from the body, such also ought thy departure from men to be, for nature
united thee to them and associated thee. But does she now dissolve
the union? Well, I am separated as from kinsmen, not however dragged
resisting, but without compulsion; for this too is one of the things
according to nature. 

Accustom thyself as much as possible on the occasion of anything being
done by any person to inquire with thyself, For what object is this
man doing this? But begin with thyself, and examine thyself first.

Remember that this which pulls the strings is the thing which is hidden
within: this is the power of persuasion, this is life, this, if one
may so say, is man. In contemplating thyself never include the vessel
which surrounds thee and these instruments which are attached about
it. For they are like to an axe, differing only in this that they
grow to the body. For indeed there is no more use in these parts without
the cause which moves and checks them than in the weaver's shuttle,
and the writer's pen and the driver's whip. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK ELEVEN

These are the properties of the rational soul: it sees itself, analyses
itself, and makes itself such as it chooses; the fruit which it bears
itself enjoys- for the fruits of plants and that in animals which
corresponds to fruits others enjoy- it obtains its own end, wherever
the limit of life may be fixed. Not as in a dance and in a play and
in such like things, where the whole action is incomplete, if anything
cuts it short; but in every part and wherever it may be stopped, it
makes what has been set before it full and complete, so that it can
say, I have what is my own. And further it traverses the whole universe,
and the surrounding vacuum, and surveys its form, and it extends itself
into the infinity of time, and embraces and comprehends the periodical
renovation of all things, and it comprehends that those who come after
us will see nothing new, nor have those before us seen anything more,
but in a manner he who is forty years old, if he has any understanding
at all, has seen by virtue of the uniformity that prevails all things
which have been and all that will be. This too is a property of the
rational soul, love of one's neighbour, and truth and modesty, and
to value nothing more more than itself, which is also the property
of Law. Thus then right reason differs not at all from the reason
of justice. 

Thou wilt set little value on pleasing song and dancing and the pancratium,
if thou wilt distribute the melody of the voice into its several sounds,
and ask thyself as to each, if thou art mastered by this; for thou
wilt be prevented by shame from confessing it: and in the matter of
dancing, if at each movement and attitude thou wilt do the same; and
the like also in the matter of the pancratium. In all things, then,
except virtue and the acts of virtue, remember to apply thyself to
their several parts, and by this division to come to value them little:
and apply this rule also to thy whole life. 

What a soul that is which is ready, if at any moment it must be separated
from the body, and ready either to be extinguished or dispersed or
continue to exist; but so that this readiness comes from a man's own
judgement, not from mere obstinacy, as with the Christians, but considerately
and with dignity and in a way to persuade another, without tragic
show. 

Have I done something for the general interest? Well then I have had
my reward. Let this always be present to thy mind, and never stop
doing such good. 

What is thy art? To be good. And how is this accomplished well except
by general principles, some about the nature of the universe, and
others about the proper constitution of man? 

At first tragedies were brought on the stage as means of reminding
men of the things which happen to them, and that it is according to
nature for things to happen so, and that, if you are delighted with
what is shown on the stage, you should not be troubled with that which
takes place on the larger stage. For you see that these things must
be accomplished thus, and that even they bear them who cry out "O
Cithaeron." And, indeed, some things are said well by the dramatic
writers, of which kind is the following especially:- 

Me and my children if the gods neglect, 
This has its reason too. And again- 

We must not chale and fret at that which happens. And 

Life's harvest reap like the wheat's fruitful ear. And other things
of the same kind. 

After tragedy the old comedy was introduced, which had a magisterial
freedom of speech, and by its very plainness of speaking was useful
in reminding men to beware of insolence; and for this purpose too
Diogenes used to take from these writers. 

But as to the middle comedy which came next, observe what it was,
and again, for what object the new comedy was introduced, which gradually
sunk down into a mere mimic artifice. That some good things are said
even by these writers, everybody knows: but the whole plan of such
poetry and dramaturgy, to what end does it look! 

How plain does it appear that there is not another condition of life
so well suited for philosophising as this in which thou now happenest
to be. 

A branch cut off from the adjacent branch must of necessity be cut
off from the whole tree also. So too a man when he is separated from
another man has fallen off from the whole social community. Now as
to a branch, another cuts it off, but a man by his own act separates
himself from his neighbour when he hates him and turns away from him,
and he does not know that he has at the same time cut himself off
from the whole social system. Yet he has this privilege certainly
from Zeus who framed society, for it is in our power to grow again
to that which is near to us, and be to come a part which helps to
make up the whole. However, if it often happens, this kind of separation,
it makes it difficult for that which detaches itself to be brought
to unity and to be restored to its former condition. Finally, the
branch, which from the first grew together with the tree, and has
continued to have one life with it, is not like that which after being
cut off is then ingrafted, for this is something like what the gardeners
mean when they say that it grows with the rest of the tree, but that
it has not the same mind with it. 

As those who try to stand in thy way when thou art proceeding according
to right reason, will not be able to turn thee aside from thy proper
action, so neither let them drive thee from thy benevolent feelings
towards them, but be on thy guard equally in both matters, not only
in the matter of steady judgement and action, but also in the matter
of gentleness towards those who try to hinder or otherwise trouble
thee. For this also is a weakness, to be vexed at them, as well as
to be diverted from thy course of action and to give way through fear;
for both are equally deserters from their post, the man who does it
through fear, and the man who is alienated from him who is by nature
a kinsman and a friend. 

There is no nature which is inferior to art, for the arts imitate
the nature of things. But if this is so, that nature which is the
most perfect and the most comprehensive of all natures, cannot fall
short of the skill of art. Now all arts do the inferior things for
the sake of the superior; therefore the universal nature does so too.
And, indeed, hence is the origin of justice, and in justice the other
virtues have their foundation: for justice will not be observed, if
we either care for middle things (things indifferent), or are easily
deceived and careless and changeable. 

If the things do not come to thee, the pursuits and avoidances of
which disturb thee, still in a manner thou goest to them. Let then
thy judgement about them be at rest, and they will remain quiet, and
thou wilt not be seen either pursuing or avoiding. 

The spherical form of the soul maintains its figure, when it is neither
extended towards any object, nor contracted inwards, nor dispersed
nor sinks down, but is illuminated by light, by which it sees the
truth, the truth of all things and the truth that is in itself.

Suppose any man shall despise me. Let him look to that himself. But
I will look to this, that I be not discovered doing or saying anything
deserving of contempt. Shall any man hate me? Let him look to it.
But I will be mild and benevolent towards every man, and ready to
show even him his mistake, not reproachfully, nor yet as making a
display of my endurance, but nobly and honestly, like the great Phocion,
unless indeed he only assumed it. For the interior parts ought to
be such, and a man ought to be seen by the gods neither dissatisfied
with anything nor complaining. For what evil is it to thee, if thou
art now doing what is agreeable to thy own nature, and art satisfied
with that which at this moment is suitable to the nature of the universe,
since thou art a human being placed at thy post in order that what
is for the common advantage may be done in some way? 

Men despise one another and flatter one another; and men wish to raise
themselves above one another, and crouch before one another.

How unsound and insincere is he who says, I have determined to deal
with thee in a fair way.- What art thou doing, man? There is no occasion
to give this notice. It will soon show itself by acts. The voice ought
to be plainly written on the forehead. Such as a man's character is,
he immediately shows it in his eyes, just as he who is beloved forthwith
reads everything in the eyes of lovers. The man who is honest and
good ought to be exactly like a man who smells strong, so that the
bystander as soon as he comes near him must smell whether he choose
or not. But the affectation of simplicity is like a crooked stick.
Nothing is more disgraceful than a wolfish friendship (false friendship).
Avoid this most of all. The good and simple and benevolent show all
these things in the eyes, and there is no mistaking. 

As to living in the best way, this power is in the soul, if it be
indifferent to things which are indifferent. And it will be indifferent,
if it looks on each of these things separately and all together, and
if it remembers that not one of them produces in us an opinion about
itself, nor comes to us; but these things remain immovable, and it
is we ourselves who produce the judgements about them, and, as we
may say, write them in ourselves, it being in our power not to write
them, and it being in our power, if perchance these judgements have
imperceptibly got admission to our minds, to wipe them out; and if
we remember also that such attention will only be for a short time,
and then life will be at an end. Besides, what trouble is there at
all in doing this? For if these things are according to nature, rejoice
in them, and they will be easy to thee: but if contrary to nature,
seek what is conformable to thy own nature, and strive towards this,
even if it bring no reputation; for every man is allowed to seek his
own good. 

Consider whence each thing is come, and of what it consists, and into
what it changes, and what kind of a thing it will be when it has changed,
and that it will sustain no harm. 

If any have offended against thee, consider first: What is my relation
to men, and that we are made for one another; and in another respect,
I was made to be set over them, as a ram over the flock or a bull
over the herd. But examine the matter from first principles, from
this: If all things are not mere atoms, it is nature which orders
all things: if this is so, the inferior things exist for the sake
of the superior, and these for the sake of one another. 

Second, consider what kind of men they are at table, in bed, and so
forth: and particularly, under what compulsions in respect of opinions
they are; and as to their acts, consider with what pride they do what
they do. 

Third, that if men do rightly what they do, we ought not to be displeased;
but if they do not right, it is plain that they do so involuntarily
and in ignorance. For as every soul is unwillingly deprived of the
truth, so also is it unwillingly deprived of the power of behaving
to each man according to his deserts. Accordingly men are pained when
they are called unjust, ungrateful, and greedy, and in a word wrong-doers
to their neighbours. 

Fourth, consider that thou also doest many things wrong, and that
thou art a man like others; and even if thou dost abstain from certain
faults, still thou hast the disposition to commit them, though either
through cowardice, or concern about reputation, or some such mean
motive, thou dost abstain from such faults. 

Fifth, consider that thou dost not even understand whether men are
doing wrong or not, for many things are done with a certain reference
to circumstances. And in short, a man must learn a great deal to enable
him to pass a correct judgement on another man's acts. 

Sixth, consider when thou art much vexed or grieved, that man's life
is only a moment, and after a short time we are all laid out dead.

Seventh, that it is not men's acts which disturb us, for those acts
have their foundation in men's ruling principles, but it is our own
opinions which disturb us. Take away these opinions then, and resolve
to dismiss thy judgement about an act as if it were something grievous,
and thy anger is gone. How then shall I take away these opinions?
By reflecting that no wrongful act of another brings shame on thee:
for unless that which is shameful is alone bad, thou also must of
necessity do many things wrong, and become a robber and everything
else. 

Eighth, consider how much more pain is brought on us by the anger
and vexation caused by such acts than by the acts themselves, at which
we are angry and vexed. 

Ninth, consider that a good disposition is invincible, if it be genuine,
and not an affected smile and acting a part. For what will the most
violent man do to thee, if thou continuest to be of a kind disposition
towards him, and if, as opportunity offers, thou gently admonishest
him and calmly correctest his errors at the very time when he is trying
to do thee harm, saying, Not so, my child: we are constituted by nature
for something else: I shall certainly not be injured, but thou art
injuring thyself, my child.- And show him with gentle tact and by
general principles that this is so, and that even bees do not do as
he does, nor any animals which are formed by nature to be gregarious.
And thou must do this neither with any double meaning nor in the way
of reproach, but affectionately and without any rancour in thy soul;
and not as if thou wert lecturing him, nor yet that any bystander
may admire, but either when he is alone, and if others are present...

Remember these nine rules, as if thou hadst received them as a gift
from the Muses, and begin at last to be a man while thou livest. But
thou must equally avoid flattering men and being veied at them, for
both are unsocial and lead to harm. And let this truth be present
to thee in the excitement of anger, that to be moved by passion is
not manly, but that mildness and gentleness, as they are more agreeable
to human nature, so also are they more manly; and he who possesses
these qualities possesses strength, nerves and courage, and not the
man who is subject to fits of passion and discontent. For in the same
degree in which a man's mind is nearer to freedom from all passion,
in the same degree also is it nearer to strength: and as the sense
of pain is a characteristic of weakness, so also is anger. For he
who yields to pain and he who yields to anger, both are wounded and
both submit. 

But if thou wilt, receive also a tenth present from the leader of
the Muses (Apollo), and it is this- that to expect bad men not to
do wrong is madness, for he who expects this desires an impossibility.
But to allow men to behave so to others, and to expect them not to
do thee any wrong, is irrational and tyrannical. 

There are four principal aberrations of the superior faculty against
which thou shouldst be constantly on thy guard, and when thou hast
detected them, thou shouldst wipe them out and say on each occasion
thus: this thought is not necessary: this tends to destroy social
union: this which thou art going to say comes not from the real thoughts;
for thou shouldst consider it among the most absurd of things for
a man not to speak from his real thoughts. But the fourth is when
thou shalt reproach thyself for anything, for this is an evidence
of the diviner part within thee being overpowered and yielding to
the less honourable and to the perishable part, the body, and to its
gross pleasures. 

Thy aerial part and all the fiery parts which are mingled in thee,
though by nature they have an upward tendency, still in obedience
to the disposition of the universe they are overpowered here in the
compound mass (the body). And also the whole of the earthy part in
thee and the watery, though their tendency is downward, still are
raised up and occupy a position which is not their natural one. In
this manner then the elemental parts obey the universal, for when
they have been fixed in any place perforce they remain there until
again the universal shall sound the signal for dissolution. Is it
not then strange that thy intelligent part only should be disobedient
and discontented with its own place? And yet no force is imposed on
it, but only those things which are conformable to its nature: still
it does not submit, but is carried in the opposite direction. For
the movement towards injustice and intemperance and to anger and grief
and fear is nothing else than the act of one who deviates from nature.
And also when the ruling faculty is discontented with anything that
happens, then too it deserts its post: for it is constituted for piety
and reverence towards the gods no less than for justice. For these
qualities also are comprehended under the generic term of contentment
with the constitution of things, and indeed they are prior to acts
of justice. 

He who has not one and always the same object in life, cannot be one
and the same all through his life. But what I have said is not enough,
unless this also is added, what this object ought to be. For as there
is not the same opinion about all the things which in some way or
other are considered by the majority to be good, but only about some
certain things, that is, things which concern the common interest;
so also ought we to propose to ourselves an object which shall be
of a common kind (social) and political. For he who directs all his
own efforts to this object, will make all his acts alike, and thus
will always be the same. 

Think of the country mouse and of the town mouse, and of the alarm
and trepidation of the town mouse. 

Socrates used to call the opinions of the many by the name of Lamiae,
bugbears to frighten children. 

The Lacedaemonians at their public spectacles used to set seats in
the shade for strangers, but themselves sat down anywhere.

Socrates excused himself to Perdiccas for not going to him, saying,
It is because I would not perish by the worst of all ends, that is,
I would not receive a favour and then be unable to return it.

In the writings of the Ephesians there was this precept, constantly
to think of some one of the men of former times who practised virtue.

The Pythagoreans bid us in the morning look to the heavens that we
may be reminded of those bodies which continually do the same things
and in the same manner perform their work, and also be reminded of
their purity and nudity. For there is no veil over a star.

Consider what a man Socrates was when he dressed himself in a skin,
after Xanthippe had taken his cloak and gone out, and what Socrates
said to his friends who were ashamed of him and drew back from him
when they saw him dressed thus. 

Neither in writing nor in reading wilt thou be able to lay down rules
for others before thou shalt have first learned to obey rules thyself.
Much more is this so in life. 

A slave thou art: free speech is not for thee. 
And my heart laughed within. 
And virtue they will curse, speaking harsh words. 
To look for the fig in winter is a madman's act: such is he who looks
for his child when it is no longer allowed. 

When a man kisses his child, said Epictetus, he should whisper to
himself, "To-morrow perchance thou wilt die."- But those are words
of bad omen.- "No word is a word of bad omen," said Epictetus, "which
expresses any work of nature; or if it is so, it is also a word of
bad omen to speak of the ears of corn being reaped." 

The unripe grape, the ripe bunch, the dried grape, all are changes,
not into nothing, but into something which exists not yet.

No man can rob us of our free will. 
Epictetus also said, A man must discover an art (or rules) with respect
to giving his assent; and in respect to his movements he must be careful
that they be made with regard to circumstances, that they be consistent
with social interests, that they have regard to the value of the object;
and as to sensual desire, he should altogether keep away from it;
and as to avoidance (aversion) he should not show it with respect
to any of the things which are not in our power. 

The dispute then, he said, is not about any common matter, but about
being mad or not. 

Socrates used to say, What do you want? Souls of rational men or irrational?-
Souls of rational men.- Of what rational men? Sound or unsound?- Sound.-
Why then do you not seek for them?- Because we have them.- Why then
do you fight and quarrel? 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK TWELVE

All those things at which thou wishest to arrive by a circuitous
road, thou canst have now, if thou dost not refuse them to thyself.
And this means, if thou wilt take no notice of all the past, and trust
the future to providence, and direct the present only conformably
to piety and justice. Conformably to piety, that thou mayest be content
with the lot which is assigned to thee, for nature designed it for
thee and thee for it. Conformably to justice, that thou mayest always
speak the truth freely and without disguise, and do the things which
are agreeable to law and according to the worth of each. And let neither
another man's wickedness hinder thee, nor opinion nor voice, nor yet
the sensations of the poor flesh which has grown about thee; for the
passive part will look to this. If then, whatever the time may be
when thou shalt be near to thy departure, neglecting everything else
thou shalt respect only thy ruling faculty and the divinity within
thee, and if thou shalt be afraid not because thou must some time
cease to live, but if thou shalt fear never to have begun to live
according to nature- then thou wilt be a man worthy of the universe
which has produced thee, and thou wilt cease to be a stranger in thy
native land, and to wonder at things which happen daily as if they
were something unexpected, and to be dependent on this or that.

God sees the minds (ruling principles) of all men bared of the material
vesture and rind and impurities. For with his intellectual part alone
he touches the intelligence only which has flowed and been derived
from himself into these bodies. And if thou also usest thyself to
do this, thou wilt rid thyself of thy much trouble. For he who regards
not the poor flesh which envelops him, surely will not trouble himself
by looking after raiment and dwelling and fame and such like externals
and show. 

The things are three of which thou art composed, a little body, a
little breath (life), intelligence. Of these the first two are thine,
so far as it is thy duty to take care of them; but the third alone
is properly thine. Therefore if thou shalt separate from thyself,
that is, from thy understanding, whatever others do or say, and whatever
thou hast done or said thyself, and whatever future things trouble
thee because they may happen, and whatever in the body which envelops
thee or in the breath (life), which is by nature associated with the
body, is attached to thee independent of thy will, and whatever the
external circumfluent vortex whirls round, so that the intellectual
power exempt from the things of fate can live pure and free by itself,
doing what is just and accepting what happens and saying the truth:
if thou wilt separate, I say, from this ruling faculty the things
which are attached to it by the impressions of sense, and the things
of time to come and of time that is past, and wilt make thyself like
Empedocles' sphere, 

All round, and in its joyous rest reposing; and if thou shalt strive
to live only what is really thy life, that is, the present- then thou
wilt be able to pass that portion of life which remains for thee up
to the time of thy death, free from perturbations, nobly, and obedient
to thy own daemon (to the god that is within thee). 

I have often wondered how it is that every man loves himself more
than all the rest of men, but yet sets less value on his own opinion
of himself than on the opinion of others. If then a god or a wise
teacher should present himself to a man and bid him to think of nothing
and to design nothing which he would not express as soon as he conceived
it, he could not endure it even for a single day. So much more respect
have we to what our neighbours shall think of us than to what we shall
think of ourselves. 

How can it be that the gods after having arranged all things well
and benevolently for mankind, have overlooked this alone, that some
men and very good men, and men who, as we may say, have had most communion
with the divinity, and through pious acts and religious observances
have been most intimate with the divinity, when they have once died
should never exist again, but should be completely extinguished?

But if this is so, be assured that if it ought to have been otherwise,
the gods would have done it. For if it were just, it would also be
possible; and if it were according to nature, nature would have had
it so. But because it is not so, if in fact it is not so, be thou
convinced that it ought not to have been so:- for thou seest even
of thyself that in this inquiry thou art disputing with the diety;
and we should not thus dispute with the gods, unless they were most
excellent and most just;- but if this is so, they would not have allowed
anything in the ordering of the universe to be neglected unjustly
and irrationally. 

Practise thyself even in the things which thou despairest of accomplishing.
For even the left hand, which is ineffectual for all other things
for want of practice, holds the bridle more vigorously than the right
hand; for it has been practised in this. 

Consider in what condition both in body and soul a man should be when
he is overtaken by death; and consider the shortness of life, the
boundless abyss of time past and future, the feebleness of all matter.

Contemplate the formative principles (forms) of things bare of their
coverings; the purposes of actions; consider what pain is, what pleasure
is, and death, and fame; who is to himself the cause of his uneasiness;
how no man is hindered by another; that everything is opinion.

In the application of thy principles thou must be like the pancratiast,
not like the gladiator; for the gladiator lets fall the sword which
he uses and is killed; but the other always has his hand, and needs
to do nothing else than use it. 

See what things are in themselves, dividing them into matter, form
and purpose. 

What a power man has to do nothing except what God will approve, and
to accept all that God may give him. 

With respect to that which happens conformably to nature, we ought
to blame neither gods, for they do nothing wrong either voluntarily
or involuntarily, nor men, for they do nothing wrong except involuntarily.
Consequently we should blame nobody. 

How ridiculous and what a stranger he is who is surprised at anything
which happens in life. 

Either there is a fatal necessity and invincible order, or a kind
Providence, or a confusion without a purpose and without a director
(Book IV). If then there is an invincible necessity, why dost thou
resist? But if there is a Providence which allows itself to be propitiated,
make thyself worthy of the help of the divinity. But if there is a
confusion without governor, be content that in such a tempest thou
hast in thyself a certain ruling intelligence. And even if the tempest
carry thee away, let it carry away the poor flesh, the poor breath,
everything else; for the intelligence at least it will not carry away.

Does the light of the lamp shine without losing its splendour until
it is extinguished; and shall the truth which is in thee and justice
and temperance be extinguished before thy death? 

When a man has presented the appearance of having done wrong, say,
How then do I know if this is a wrongful act? And even if he has done
wrong, how do I know that he has not condemned himself? and so this
is like tearing his own face. Consider that he, who would not have
the bad man do wrong, is like the man who would not have the fig-tree
to bear juice in the figs and infants to cry and the horse to neigh,
and whatever else must of necessity be. For what must a man do who
has such a character? If then thou art irritable, cure this man's
disposition. 

If it is not right, do not do it: if it is not true, do not say it.
For let thy efforts be- 

In everything always observe what the thing is which produces for
thee an appearance, and resolve it by dividing it into the formal,
the material, the purpose, and the time within which it must end.

Perceive at last that thou hast in thee something better and more
divine than the things which cause the various affects, and as it
were pull thee by the strings. What is there now in my mind? Is it
fear, or suspicion, or desire, or anything of the kind? 

First, do nothing inconsiderately, nor without a purpose. Second,
make thy acts refer to nothing else than to a social end.

Consider that before long thou wilt be nobody and nowhere, nor will
any of the things exist which thou now seest, nor any of those who
are now living. For all things are formed by nature to change and
be turned and to perish in order that other things in continuous succession
may exist. 

Consider that everything is opinion, and opinion is in thy power.
Take away then, when thou choosest, thy opinion, and like a mariner,
who has doubled the promontory, thou wilt find calm, everything stable,
and a waveless bay. 

Any one activity whatever it may be, when it has ceased at its proper
time, suffers no evil because it has ceased; nor he who has done this
act, does he suffer any evil for this reason that the act has ceased.
In like manner then the whole which consists of all the acts, which
is our life, if it cease at its proper time, suffers no evil for this
reason that it has ceased; nor he who has terminated this series at
the proper time, has he been ill dealt with. But the proper time and
the limit nature fixes, sometimes as in old age the peculiar nature
of man, but always the universal nature, by the change of whose parts
the whole universe continues ever young and perfect. And everything
which is useful to the universal is always good and in season. Therefore
the termination of life for every man is no evil, because neither
is it shameful, since it is both independent of the will and not opposed
to the general interest, but it is good, since it is seasonable and
profitable to and congruent with the universal. For thus too he is
moved by the deity who is moved in the same manner with the deity
and moved towards the same things in his mind. 

These three principles thou must have in readiness. In the things
which thou doest do nothing either inconsiderately or otherwise than
as justice herself would act; but with respect to what may happen
to thee from without, consider that it happens either by chance or
according to Providence, and thou must neither blame chance nor accuse
Providence. Second, consider what every being is from the seed to
the time of its receiving a soul, and from the reception of a soul
to the giving back of the same, and of what things every being is
compounded and into what things it is resolved. Third, if thou shouldst
suddenly be raised up above the earth, and shouldst look down on human
things, and observe the variety of them how great it is, and at the
same time also shouldst see at a glance how great is the number of
beings who dwell around in the air and the aether, consider that as
often as thou shouldst be raised up, thou wouldst see the same things,
sameness of form and shortness of duration. Are these things to be
proud of? 

Cast away opinion: thou art saved. Who then hinders thee from casting
it away? 

When thou art troubled about anything, thou hast forgotten this, that
all things happen according to the universal nature; and forgotten
this, that a man's wrongful act is nothing to thee; and further thou
hast forgotten this, that everything which happens, always happened
so and will happen so, and now happens so everywhere; forgotten this
too, how close is the kinship between a man and the whole human race,
for it is a community, not of a little blood or seed, but of intelligence.
And thou hast forgotten this too, that every man's intelligence is
a god, and is an efflux of the deity; and forgotten this, that nothing
is a man's own, but that his child and his body and his very soul
came from the deity; forgotten this, that everything is opinion; and
lastly thou hast forgotten that every man lives the present time only,
and loses only this. 

Constantly bring to thy recollection those who have complained greatly
about anything, those who have been most conspicuous by the greatest
fame or misfortunes or enmities or fortunes of any kind: then think
where are they all now? Smoke and ash and a tale, or not even a tale.
And let there be present to thy mind also everything of this sort,
how Fabius Catullinus lived in the country, and Lucius Lupus in his
gardens, and Stertinius at Baiae, and Tiberius at Capreae and Velius
Rufus (or Rufus at Velia); and in fine think of the eager pursuit
of anything conjoined with pride; and how worthless everything is
after which men violently strain; and how much more philosophical
it is for a man in the opportunities presented to him to show

                                     101 AD

                                 THE DISCOURSES

                                  by Epictetus
DISCOURSES

                                    BOOK ONE

  CHAPTER 1

  Of the things which are in our Power, and not in our Power

  Of all the faculties, you will find not one which is capable of
contemplating itself; and, consequently, not capable either of
approving or disapproving. How far does the grammatic art possess
the contemplating power? As far as forming a judgement about what is
written and spoken. And how far music? As far as judging about melody.
Does either of them then contemplate itself? By no means. But when you
must write something to your friend, grammar will tell you what
words you must write; but whether you should write or not, grammar
will not tell you. And so it is with music as to musical sounds; but
whether you should sing at the present time and play on the lute, or
do neither, music will not tell you. What faculty then will tell
you? That which contemplates both itself and all other things. And
what is this faculty? The rational faculty; for this is the only
faculty that we have received which examines itself, what it is, and
what power it has, and what is the value of this gift, and examines
all other faculties: for what else is there which tells us that golden
things are beautiful, for they do not say so themselves? Evidently
it is the faculty which is capable of judging of appearances. What
else judges of music, grammar, and other faculties, proves their
uses and points out the occasions for using them? Nothing else.

  As then it was fit to be so, that which is best of all and supreme
over all is the only thing which the gods have placed in our power,
the right use of appearances; but all other things they have not
placed in our power. Was it because they did not choose? I indeed
think that, if they had been able, they would have put these other
things also in our power, but they certainly could not. For as we
exist on the earth, and are bound to such a body and to such
companions, how was it possible for us not to be hindered as to
these things by externals?

  But what says Zeus? "Epictetus, if it were possible, I would have
made both your little body and your little property free and not
exposed to hindrance. But now be not ignorant of this: this body is
not yours, but it is clay finely tempered. And since I was not able to
do for you what I have mentioned, I have given you a small portion
of us, this faculty of pursuing an object and avoiding it, and the
faculty of desire and aversion, and, in a word, the faculty of using
the appearances of things; and if you will take care of this faculty
and consider it your only possession, you will never be hindered,
never meet with impediments; you will not lament, you will not
blame, you will not flatter any person."

  "Well, do these seem to you small matters?" I hope not. "Be
content with them then and pray to the gods." But now when it is in
our power to look after one thing, and to attach ourselves to it, we
prefer to look after many things, and to be bound to many things, to
the body and to property, and to brother and to friend, and to child
and to slave. Since, then, we are bound to many things, we are
depressed by them and dragged down. For this reason, when the
weather is not fit for sailing, we sit down and torment ourselves, and
continually look out to see what wind is blowing. "It is north."
What is that to us? "When will the west wind blow?" When it shall
choose, my good man, or when it shall please AEolus; for God has not
made you the manager of the winds, but AEolus. What then? We must make
the best use that we can of the things which are in our power, and use
the rest according to their nature. What is their nature then? As
God may please.

  "Must I, then, alone have my head cut off?" What, would you have all
men lose their heads that you may be consoled? Will you not stretch
out your neck as Lateranus did at Rome when Nero ordered him to be
beheaded? For when he had stretched out his neck, and received a
feeble blow, which made him draw it in for a moment, he stretched it
out again. And a little before, when he was visited by Epaphroditus,
Nero's freedman, who asked him about the cause of offense which he had
given, he said, "If I choose to tell anything, I will tell your
master."

  What then should a man have in readiness in such circumstances? What
else than "What is mine, and what is not mine; and permitted to me,
and what is not permitted to me." I must die. Must I then die
lamenting? I must be put in chains. Must I then also lament? I must go
into exile. Does any man then hinder me from going with smiles and
cheerfulness and contentment? "Tell me the secret which you
possess." I will not, for this is in my power. "But I will put you
in chains." Man, what are you talking about? Me in chains? You may
fetter my leg, but my will not even Zeus himself can overpower. "I
will throw you into prison." My poor body, you mean. "I will cut
your head off." When, then, have I told you that my head alone
cannot be cut off? These are the things which philosophers should
meditate on, which they should write daily, in which they should
exercise themselves.

  Thrasea used to say, "I would rather be killed to-day than
banished to-morrow." What, then, did Rufus say to him? "If you
choose death as the heavier misfortune, how great is the folly of your
choice? But if, as the lighter, who has given you the choice? Will you
not study to be content with that which has been given to you?"

  What, then, did Agrippinus say? He said, "I am not a hindrance to
myself." When it was reported to him that his trial was going on in
the Senate, he said, "I hope it may turn out well; but it is the fifth
hour of the day"- this was the time when he was used to exercise
himself and then take the cold bath- "let us go and take our
exercise." After he had taken his exercise, one comes and tells him,
"You have been condemned." "To banishment," he replies, "or to death?"
"To banishment." "What about my property?" "It is not taken from you."
"Let us go to Aricia then," he said, "and dine."

  This it is to have studied what a man ought to study; to have made
desire, aversion, free from hindrance, and free from all that a man
would avoid. I must die. If now, I am ready to die. If, after a
short time, I now dine because it is the dinner-hour; after this I
will then die. How? Like a man who gives up what belongs to another.

  CHAPTER 2

  How a Man on every occasion can maintain his Proper Character

  To the rational animal only is the irrational intolerable; but
that which is rational is tolerable. Blows are not naturally
intolerable. "How is that?" See how the Lacedaemonians endure whipping
when they have learned that whipping is consistent with reason. "To
hang yourself is not intolerable." When, then, you have the opinion
that it is rational, you go and hang yourself. In short, if we
observe, we shall find that the animal man is pained by nothing so
much as by that which is irrational; and, on the contrary, attracted
to nothing so much as to that which is rational.

  But the rational and the irrational appear such in a different way
to different persons, just as the good and the bad, the profitable and
the unprofitable. For this reason, particularly, we need discipline,
in order to learn how to adapt the preconception of the rational and
the irrational to the several things conformably to nature. But in
order to determine the rational and the irrational, we use not only
the of external things, but we consider also what is appropriate to
each person. For to one man it is consistent with reason to hold a
chamber pot for another, and to look to this only, that if he does not
hold it, he will receive stripes, and he will not receive his food:
but if he shall hold the pot, he will not suffer anything hard or
disagreeable. But to another man not only does the holding of a
chamber pot appear intolerable for himself, but intolerable also for
him to allow another to do this office for him. If, then, you ask me
whether you should hold the chamber pot or not, I shall say to you
that the receiving of food is worth more than the not receiving of it,
and the being scourged is a greater indignity than not being scourged;
so that if you measure your interests by these things, go and hold the
chamber pot. "But this," you say, "would not be worthy of me." Well,
then, it is you who must introduce this consideration into the
inquiry, not I; for it is you who know yourself, how much you are
worth to yourself, and at what price you sell yourself; for men sell
themselves at various prices.

  For this reason, when Florus was deliberating whether he should go
down to Nero's spectacles and also perform in them himself, Agrippinus
said to him, "Go down": and when Florus asked Agrippinus, "Why do
not you go down?" Agrippinus replied, "Because I do not even
deliberate about the matter." For he who has once brought himself to
deliberate about such matters, and to calculate the value of
external things, comes very near to those who have forgotten their own
character. For why do you ask me the question, whether death is
preferable or life? I say "life." "Pain or pleasure?" I say
"pleasure." But if I do not take a part in the tragic acting, I
shall have my head struck off. Go then and take a part, but I will
not. "Why?" Because you consider yourself to be only one thread of
those which are in the tunic. Well then it was fitting for you to take
care how you should be like the rest of men, just as the thread has no
design to be anything superior to the other threads. But I wish to
be purple, that small part which is bright, and makes all the rest
appear graceful and beautiful. Why then do you tell me to make
myself like the many? and if I do, how shall I still be purple?

  Priscus Helvidius also saw this, and acted conformably. For when
Vespasian sent and commanded him not to go into the senate, he
replied, "It is in your power not to allow me to be a member of the
senate, but so long as I am, I must go in." "Well, go in then," says
the emperor, "but say nothing." "Do not ask my opinion, and I will
be silent." "But I must ask your opinion." "And I must say what I
think right." "But if you do, I shall put you to death." "When then
did I tell you that I am immortal? You will do your part, and I will
do mine: it is your part to kill; it is mine to die, but not in
fear: yours to banish me; mine to depart without sorrow."

  What good then did Priscus do, who was only a single person? And
what good does the purple do for the toga? Why, what else than this,
that it is conspicuous in the toga as purple, and is displayed also as
a fine example to all other things? But in such circumstances
another would have replied to Caesar who forbade him to enter the
senate, "I thank you for sparing me." But such a man Vespasian would
not even have forbidden to enter the senate, for he knew that he would
either sit there like an earthen vessel, or, if he spoke, he would say
what Caesar wished, and add even more.

  In this way an athlete also acted who was in danger of dying
unless his private parts were amputated. His brother came to the
athlete, who was a philosopher, and said, "Come, brother, what are you
going to do? Shall we amputate this member and return to the
gymnasium?" But the athlete persisted in his resolution and died. When
some one asked Epictetus how he did this, as an athlete or a
philosopher, "As a man," Epictetus replied, "and a man who had been
proclaimed among the athletes at the Olympic games and had contended
in them, a man who had been familiar with such a place, and not merely
anointed in Baton's school. Another would have allowed even his head
to be cut off, if he could have lived without it. Such is that
regard to character which is so strong in those who have been
accustomed to introduce it of themselves and conjoined with other
things into their deliberations."

  "Come, then, Epictetus, shave yourself." "If I am a philosopher,"
I answer, "I will not shave myself." "But I will take off your
head?" If that will do you any good, take it off.

  Some person asked, "How then shall every man among us perceive
what is suitable to his character?" How, he replied, does the bull
alone, when the lion has attacked, discover his own powers and put
himself forward in defense of the whole herd? It is plain that with
the powers the perception of having them is immediately conjoined;
and, therefore, whoever of us has such powers will not be ignorant
of them. Now a bull is not made suddenly, nor a brave man; but we must
discipline ourselves in the winter for the summer campaign, and not
rashly run upon that which does not concern us.

  Only consider at what price you sell your own will; if for no
other reason, at least for this, that you sell it not for a small sum.
But that which is great and superior perhaps belongs to Socrates and
such as are like him. "Why then, if we are naturally such, are not a
very great number of us like him?" Is it true then that all horses
become swift, that all dogs are skilled in tracking footprints? "What,
then, since I am naturally dull, shall I, for this reason, take no
pains?" I hope not. Epictetus is not superior to Socrates; but if he
is not inferior, this is enough for me; for I shall never be a Milo,
and yet I do not neglect my body; nor shall I be a Croesus, and yet
I do not neglect my property; nor, in a word, do we neglect looking
after anything because we despair of reaching the highest degree.

  CHAPTER 3

  How a man should proceed from the principle of God being the
father of all men to the rest

  If a man should be able to assent to this doctrine as he ought, that
we are all sprung from God in an especial manner, and that God is
the father both of men and of gods, I suppose that he would never have
any ignoble or mean thoughts about himself. But if Caesar should adopt
you, no one could endure your arrogance; and if you know that you
are the son of Zeus, will you not be elated? Yet we do not so; but
since these two things are mingled in the generation of man, body in
common with the animals, and reason and intelligence in common with
the gods, many incline to this kinship, which is miserable and mortal;
and some few to that which is divine and happy. Since then it is of
necessity that every man uses everything according to the opinion
which he has about it, those, the few, who think that they are
formed for fidelity and modesty and a sure use of appearances have
no mean or ignoble thoughts about themselves; but with the many it
is quite the contrary. For they say, "What am I? A poor, miserable
man, with my wretched bit of flesh." Wretched. Indeed; but you possess
something better than your "bit of flesh." Why then do you neglect
that which is better, and why do you attach yourself to this?

  Through this kinship with the flesh, some of us inclining to it
become like wolves, faithless and treacherous and mischievous: some
become like lions, savage and untamed; but the greater part of us
become foxes and other worse animals. For what else is a slanderer and
a malignant man than a fox, or some other more wretched and meaner
animal? See, then, and take care that you do not become some one of
these miserable things.

  CHAPTER 4

  Of progress or improvement

  He who is making progress, having learned from philosophers that
desire means the desire of good things, and aversion means aversion
from bad things; having learned too that happiness and tranquillity
are not attainable by man otherwise than by not failing to obtain what
he desires, and not falling into that which he would avoid; such a man
takes from himself desire altogether and defers it, but he employs his
aversion only on things which are dependent on his will. For if he
attempts to avoid anything independent of his will, he knows that
sometimes he will fall in with something which he wishes to avoid, and
he will be unhappy. Now if virtue promises good fortune and
tranquillity and happiness, certainly also the progress toward
virtue is progress toward each of these things. For it is always
true that to whatever point the perfecting of anything leads us,
progress is an approach toward this point.

  How then do we admit that virtue is such as I have said, and yet
seek progress in other things and make a display of it? What is the
product of virtue? Tranquillity. Who then makes improvement? It is
he who has read many books of Chrysippus? But does virtue consist in
having understood Chrysippus? If this is so, progress is clearly
nothing else than knowing a great deal of Chrysippus. But now we admit
that virtue produces one thing. and we declare that approaching near
to it is another thing, namely, progress or improvement. "Such a
person," says one, "is already able to read Chrysippus by himself."
Indeed, sir, you are making great progress. What kind of progress? But
why do you mock the man? Why do you draw him away from the
perception of his own misfortunes? Will you not show him the effect of
virtue that he may learn where to look for improvement? Seek it there,
wretch, where your work lies. And where is your work? In desire and in
aversion, that you may not be disappointed in your desire, and that
you may not fall into that which you would avoid; in your pursuit
and avoiding, that you commit no error; in assent and suspension of
assent, that you be not deceived. The first things, and the most
necessary, are those which I have named. But if with trembling and
lamentation you seek not to fall into that which you avoid, tell me
how you are improving.

  Do you then show me your improvement in these things? If I were
talking to an athlete, I should say, "Show me your shoulders"; and
then he might say, "Here are my halteres." You and your halteres
look to that. I should reply, "I wish to see the effect of the
halteres." So, when you say: "Take the treatise on the active
powers, and see how I have studied it." I reply, "Slave, I am not
inquiring about this, but how you exercise pursuit and avoidance,
desire and aversion, how your design and purpose and prepare yourself,
whether conformably to nature or not. If conformably, give me evidence
of it, and I will say that you are making progress: but if not
conformably, be gone, and not only expound your books, but write
such books yourself; and what will you gain by it? Do you not know
that the whole book costs only five denarii? Does then the expounder
seem to be worth more than five denarii? Never, then, look for the
matter itself in one place, and progress toward it in another."

  Where then is progress? If any of you, withdrawing himself from
externals, turns to his own will to exercise it and to improve it by
labour, so as to make it conformable to nature, elevated, free,
unrestrained, unimpeded, faithful, modest; and if he has learned
that he who desires or avoids the things which are not in his power
can neither be faithful nor free, but of necessity he must change with
them and be tossed about with them as in a tempest, and of necessity
must subject himself to others who have the power to procure or
prevent what he desires or would avoid; finally, when he rises in
the morning, if he observes and keeps these rules, bathes as a man
of fidelity, eats as a modest man; in like manner, if in every
matter that occurs he works out his chief principles as the runner
does with reference to running, and the trainer of the voice with
reference to the voice- this is the man who truly makes progress,
and this is the man who has not traveled in vain. But if he has
strained his efforts to the practice of reading books, and labours
only at this, and has traveled for this, I tell him to return home
immediately, and not to neglect his affairs there; for this for
which he has traveled is nothing. But the other thing is something, to
study how a man can rid his life of lamentation and groaning, and
saying, "Woe to me," and "wretched that I am," and to rid it also of
misfortune and disappointment and to learn what death is, and exile,
and prison, and poison, that he may be able to say when he is in
fetters, "Dear Crito, if it is the will of the gods that it be so, let
it be so"; and not to say, "Wretched am I, an old man; have I kept
my gray hairs for this?" Who is it that speaks thus? Do you think that
I shall name some man of no repute and of low condition? Does not
Priam say this? Does not OEdipus say this? Nay, all kings say it!
For what else is tragedy than the perturbations of men who value
externals exhibited in this kind of poetry? But if a man must learn by
fiction that no external things which are independent of the will
concern us, for this? part I should like this fiction, by the aid of
which I should live happily and undisturbed. But you must consider for
yourselves what you wish.

  What then does Chrysippus teach us? The reply is, "to know that
these things are not false, from which happiness comes and
tranquillity arises. Take my books, and you will learn how true and
conformable to nature are the things which make me free from
perturbations." O great good fortune! O the great benefactor who
points out the way! To Triptolemus all men have erected temples and
altars, because he gave us food by cultivation; but to him who
discovered truth and brought it to light and communicated it to all,
not the truth which shows us how to live, but how to live well, who of
you for this reason has built an altar, or a temple, or has
dedicated a statue, or who worships God for this? Because the gods
have given the vine, or wheat, we sacrifice to them: but because
they have produced in the human mind that fruit by which they designed
to show us the truth which relates to happiness, shall we not thank
God for this?

  CHAPTER 5

  Against the academics

  If a man, said Epictetus, opposes evident truths, it is not easy
to find arguments by which we shall make him change his opinion. But
this does not arise either from the man's strength or the teacher's
weakness; for when the man, though he has been confuted, is hardened
like a stone, how shall we then be able to deal with him by argument?

  Now there are two kinds of hardening, one of the understanding,
the other of the sense of shame, when a man is resolved not to
assent to what is manifest nor to desist from contradictions. Most
of us are afraid of mortification of the body, and would contrive
all means to avoid such a thing, but we care not about the soul's
mortification. And indeed with regard to the soul, if a man be in such
a state as not to apprehend anything, or understand at all, we think
that he is in a bad condition: but if the sense of shame and modesty
are deadened, this we call even power.

  Do you comprehend that you are awake? "I do not," the man replies,
"for I do not even comprehend when in my sleep I imagine that I am
awake." Does this appearance then not differ from the other? "Not at
all," he replies. Shall I still argue with this man? And what fire
or what iron shall I apply to him to make him feel that he is
deadened? He does perceive, but he pretends that he does not. He's
even worse than a dead man. He does not see the contradiction: he is
in a bad condition. Another does see it, but he is not moved, and
makes no improvement: he is even in a worse condition. His modesty
is extirpated, and his sense of shame; and the rational faculty has
not been cut off from him, but it is brutalized. Shall I name this
strength of mind? Certainly not, unless we also name it such in
catamites, through which they do and say in public whatever comes into
their head.

  CHAPTER 6

  Of providence

  From everything which is or happens in the world, it is easy to
praise Providence, if a man possesses these two qualities, the faculty
of seeing what belongs and happens to all persons and things, and a
grateful disposition. If he does not possess these two qualities,
one man will not see the use of things which are and which happen;
another will not be thankful for them, even if he does know them. If
God had made colours, but had not made the faculty of seeing them,
what would have been their use? None at all. On the other hand, if
He had made the faculty of vision, but had not made objects such as to
fall under the faculty, what in that case also would have been the use
of it? None at all. Well, suppose that He had made both, but had not
made light? In that case, also, they would have been of no use. Who is
it, then, who has fitted this to that and that to this? And who is
it that has fitted the knife to the case and the case to the knife? Is
it no one? And, indeed, from the very structure of things which have
attained their completion, we are accustomed to show that the work
is certainly the act of some artificer, and that it has not been
constructed without a purpose. Does then each of these things
demonstrate the workman, and do not visible things and the faculty
of seeing and light demonstrate Him? And the existence of male and
female, and the desire of each for conjunction, and the power of using
the parts which are constructed, do not even these declare the
workman? If they do not, let us consider the constitution of our
understanding according to which, when we meet with sensible
objects, we simply receive impressions from them, but we also select
something from them, and subtract something, and add, and compound
by means of them these things or those, and, in fact, pass from some
to other things which, in a manner, resemble them: is not even this
sufficient to move some men, and to induce them not to forget the
workman? If not so, let them explain to us what it is that makes
each several thing, or how it is possible that things so wonderful and
like the contrivances of art should exist by chance and from their own
proper motion?

  What, then, are these things done in us only. Many, indeed, in us
only, of which the rational animal had peculiar need; but you will
find many common to us with irrational animals. Do they them
understand what is done? By no means. For use is one thing, and
understanding is another: God had need of irrational animals to make
use of appearances, but of us to understand the use of appearances. It
is therefore enough for them to eat and to drink, and to sleep and
to copulate, and to do all the other things which they severally do.
But for us, to whom He has given also the faculty, these things are
not sufficient; for unless we act in a proper and orderly manner,
and conformably to the nature and constitution of each thing, we shall
never attain our true end. For where the constitutions of living
beings are different, there also the acts and the ends are
different. In those animals, then, whose constitution is adapted
only to use, use alone is enough: but in an animal which has also
the power of understanding the use, unless there be the due exercise
of the understanding, he will never attain his proper end. Well then
God constitutes every animal, one to be eaten, another to serve for
agriculture, another to supply cheese, and another for some like
use; for which purposes what need is there to understand appearances
and to be able to distinguish them? But God has introduced man to be a
spectator of God and of His works; and not only a spectator of them,
but an interpreter. For this reason it is shameful for man to begin
and to end where irrational animals do, but rather he ought to begin
where they begin, and to end where nature ends in us; and nature
ends in contemplation and understanding, in a way of life
conformable to nature. Take care then not to die without having been
spectators of these things.

  But you take a journey to Olympia to see the work of Phidias, and
all of you think it a misfortune to die without having seen such
things. But when there is no need to take a journey, and where a man
is, there he has the works (of God) before him, will you not desire to
see and understand them? Will you not perceive either what you are, or
what you were born for, or what this is for which you have received
the faculty of sight? But you may say, "There are some things
disagreeable and troublesome in life." And are there none in
Olympia? Are you not scorched? Are you not pressed by a crowd? Are you
not without comfortable means of bathing? Are you not wet when it
rains? Have you not abundance of noise, clamour, and other
disagreeable things? But I suppose that setting all these things off
against the magnificence of the spectacle, you bear and endure.
Well, then, and have you not received faculties by which you will be
able to bear all that happens? Have you not received greatness of
soul? Have you not received manliness? Have you not received
endurance? And why do I trouble myself about anything that can
happen if I possess greatness of soul? What shall distract my mind
or disturb me, or appear painful? Shall I not use the power for the
purposes for which I received it, and shall I grieve and lament over
what happens?

  "Yes, but my nose runs." For what purpose then, slave, have you
hands? Is it not that you may wipe your nose? "Is it, then, consistent
with reason that there should be running of noses in the world?"
Nay, how much better it is to wipe your nose than to find fault.
What do you think that Hercules would have been if there had not
been such a lion, and hydra, and stag, and boar, and certain unjust
and bestial men, whom Hercules used to drive away and clear out? And
what would he have been doing if there had been nothing of the kind?
Is it not plain that he would have wrapped himself up and have
slept? In the first place, then he would not have been a Hercules,
when he was dreaming away all his life in such luxury and case; and
even if he had been one what would have been the use of him? and
what the use of his arms, and of the strength of the other parts of
his body, and his endurance and noble spirit, if such circumstances
and occasions had not roused and exercised him? "Well, then, must a
man provide for himself such means of exercise, and to introduce a
lion from some place into his country, and a boar and a hydra?" This
would be folly and madness: but as they did exist, and were found,
they were useful for showing what Hercules was and for exercising him.
Come then do you also having observed these things look to the
faculties which you have, and when you have looked at them, say:
"Bring now, O Zeus, any difficulty that Thou pleasest, for I have
means given to me by Thee and powers for honoring myself through the
things which happen." You do not so; but you sit still, trembling
for fear that some things will happen, and weeping, and lamenting
and groaning for what does happen: and then you blame the gods. For
what is the consequence of such meanness of spirit but impiety? And
yet God has not only given us these faculties; by which we shall be
able to bear everything that happens without being depressed or broken
by it; but, like a good king and a true father, He has given us
these faculties free from hindrance, subject to no compulsion
unimpeded, and has put them entirely in our own power, without even
having reserved to Himself any power of hindering or impeding. You,
who have received these powers free and as your own, use them not: you
do not even see what you have received, and from whom; some of you
being blinded to the giver, and not even acknowledging your
benefactor, and others, through meanness of spirit, betaking
yourselves to fault finding and making charges against God. Yet I will
show to you that you have powers and means for greatness of soul and
manliness but what powers you have for finding fault and making
accusations, do you show me.

  CHAPTER 7

  Of the use of sophistical arguments, and hypothetical, and the like

  The handling of sophistical and hypothetical arguments, and of those
which derive their conclusions from questioning, and in a word the
handling of all such arguments, relates to the duties of life,
though the many do not know this truth. For in every matter we inquire
how the wise and good man shall discover the proper path and the
proper method of dealing with the matter. Let, then, people either say
that the grave man will not descend into the contest of question and
answer, or that, if he does descend into the contest, he will take
no care about not conducting himself rashly or carelessly in
questioning and answering. But if they do not allow either the one
or the other of these things, they must admit that some inquiry
ought to be made into those topics on which particularly questioning
and answering are employed. For what is the end proposed in reasoning?
To establish true propositions, to remove the false, to withhold
assent from those which are not plain. Is it enough then to have
learned only this? "It is enough," a man may reply. Is it, then,
also enough for a man, who would not make a mistake in the use of
coined money, to have heard this precept, that he should receive the
genuine drachmae and reject the spurious? "It is not enough." What,
then, ought to be added to this precept? What else than the faculty
which proves and distinguishes the genuine and the spurious
drachmae? Consequently also in reasoning what has been said is not
enough; but is it necessary that a man should acquire the faculty of
examining and distinguishing the true and the false, and that which is
not plain? "It is necessary." Besides this, what is proposed in
reasoning? "That you should accept what follows from that which you
have properly granted." Well, is it then enough in this case also to
know this? It is not enough; but a man must learn how one thing is a
consequence of other things, and when one thing follows from one
thing, and when it follows from several collectively. Consider, then
if it be not necessary that this power should also be acquired by
him who purposes to conduct himself skillfully in reasoning, the power
of demonstrating himself the several things which he has proposed, and
the power of understanding the demonstrations of others, including
of not being deceived by sophists, as if they were demonstrating.
Therefore there has arisen among us the practice and exercise of
conclusive arguments and figures, and it has been shown to be
necessary.

  But in fact in some cases we have properly granted the premisses
or assumptions, and there results from them something; and though it
is not true, yet none the less it does result. What then ought I to
do? Ought I to admit the falsehood? And how is that possible? Well,
should I say that I did not properly grant that which we agreed
upon? "But you are not allowed to do even this." Shall I then say that
the consequence does not arise through what has been conceded? "But
neither is it allowed." What then must be done in this case?
Consider if it is not this: as to have borrowed is not enough to
make a man still a debtor, but to this must be added the fact that
he continues to owe the money and that the debt is not paid, so it
is not enough to compel you to admit the inference that you have
granted the premisses, but you must abide by what you have granted.
Indeed, if the premisses continue to the end such as they were when
they were granted, it is absolutely necessary for us to abide by
what we have granted, and we must accept their consequences: but if
the premisses do not remain such as they were when they were
granted, it is absolutely necessary for us also to withdraw from
what we granted, and from accepting what does not follow from the
words in which our concessions were made. For the inference is now not
our inference, nor does it result with our assent, since we have
withdrawn from the premisses which we granted. We ought then both to
examine such kind of premisses, and such change and variation of them,
by which in the course of questioning or answering, or in making the
syllogistic conclusion, or in any other such way, the premisses
undergo variations, and give occasion to the foolish to be confounded,
if they do not see what conclusions are. For what reason ought we to
examine? In order that we may not in this matter be employed in an
improper manner nor in a confused way.

  And the same in hypotheses and hypothetical arguments; for it is
necessary sometimes to demand the granting of some hypothesis as a
kind of passage to the argument which follows. Must we then allow
every hypothesis that is proposed, or not allow every one? And if
not every one, which should we allow? And if a man has allowed an
hypothesis, must he in every case abide by allowing it? or must he
sometimes withdraw from it, but admit the consequences and not admit
contradictions? Yes; but suppose that a man says, "If you admit the
hypothesis of a possibility, I will draw you to an impossibility."
With such a person shall a man of sense refuse to enter into a
contest, and avoid discussion and conversation with him? But what
other man than the man of sense can use argumentation and is
skillful in questioning and answering, and incapable of being
cheated and deceived by false reasoning? And shall he enter into the
contest, and yet not take care whether he shall engage in argument not
rashly and not carelessly? And if he does not take care, how can he be
such a man as we conceive him to be? But without some such exercise
and preparation, can he maintain a continuous and consistent argument?
Let them show this; and all these speculations become superfluous, and
are absurd and inconsistent with our notion of a good and serious man.

  Why are we still indolent and negligent and sluggish, and why do
we seek pretences for not labouring and not being watchful in
cultivating our reason? "If then I shall make a mistake in these
matters may I not have killed my father?" Slave, where was there a
father in this matter that you could kill him? What, then, have you
done? The only fault that was possible here is the fault which you
have committed. This is the very remark which I made to Rufus when
he blamed me for not having discovered the one thing omitted in a
certain syllogism: "I suppose," I said, "that I have burnt the
Capitol." "Slave," he replied, "was the thing omitted here the
Capitol?" Or are these the only crimes, to burn the Capitol and to
kill your father? But for a man to use the appearances resented to him
rashly and foolishly and carelessly, not to understand argument, nor
demonstration, nor sophism, nor, in a word, to see in questioning
and answering what is consistent with that which we have granted or is
not consistent; is there no error in this?

  CHAPTER 8

  That the faculties are not safe to the uninstructed

  In as many ways as we can change things which are equivalent to
one another, in just so many ways we can change the forms of arguments
and enthymemes in argumentation. This is an instance: "If you have
borrowed and not repaid, you owe me the money: you have not borrowed
and you have not repaid; then you do not owe me the money." To do this
skillfully is suitable to no man more than to the philosopher; for
if the enthymeme is all imperfect syllogism. it is plain that he who
has been exercised in the perfect syllogism must be equally expert
in the imperfect also.

  "Why then do we not exercise ourselves and one another in this
manner?" Because, I reply, at present, though we are not exercised
in these things and not distracted from the study of morality, by me
at least, still we make no progress in virtue. What then must we
expect if we should add this occupation? and particularly as this
would not only be an occupation which would withdraw us from more
necessary things, but would also be a cause of self conceit and
arrogance, and no small cause. For great is the power of arguing and
the faculty of persuasion, and particularly if it should be much
exercised, and also receive additional ornament from language: and
so universally, every faculty acquired by the uninstructed and weak
brings with it the danger of these persons being elated and inflated
by it. For by what means could one persuade a young man who excels
in these matters that he ought not to become an appendage to them, but
to make them an appendage to himself? Does he not trample on all
such reasons, and strut before us elated and inflated, not enduring
that any man should reprove him and remind him of what he has
neglected and to what he has turned aside?

  "What, then, was not Plato a philosopher?" I reply, "And was not
Hippocrates a physician? but you see how Hippocrates speaks." Does
Hippocrates, then, speak thus in respect of being a physician? Why
do you mingle things which have been accidentally united in the same
men? And if Plato was handsome and strong, ought I also to set to work
and endeavor to become handsome or strong, as if this was necessary
for philosophy, because a certain philosopher was at the same time
handsome and a philosopher? Will you not choose to see and to
distinguish in respect to what men become philosophers, and what
things belong to belong to them in other respects? And if I were a
philosopher, ought you also to be made lame? What then? Do I take away
these faculties which you possess? By no means; for neither do I
take away the faculty of seeing. But if you ask me what is the good of
man, I cannot mention to you anything else than that it is a certain
disposition of the will with respect to appearances.

  CHAPTER 9

  How from the fact that we are akin to God a man may proceed to the
consequences

  If the things are true which are said by the philosophers about
the kinship between God and man, what else remains for men to do
then what Socrates did? Never in reply to the question, to what
country you belong, say that you are an Athenian or a Corinthian,
but that you are a citizen of the world. For why do you say that you
are an Athenian, and why do you not say that you belong to the small
nook only into which your poor body was cast at birth? Is it not plain
that you call yourself an Athenian or Corinthian from the place
which has a greater authority and comprises not only that small nook
itself and all your family, but even the whole country from which
the stock of your progenitors is derived down to you? He then who
has observed with intelligence the administration of the world, and
has learned that the greatest and supreme and the most comprehensive
community is that which is composed of men and God, and that from
God have descended the seeds not only to my father and grandfather,
but to all beings which are generated on the earth and are produced,
and particularly to rational beings- for these only are by their
nature formed to have communion with God, being by means of reason
conjoined with Him- why should not such a man call himself a citizen
of the world, why not a son of God, and why should he be afraid of
anything which happens among men? Is kinship with Caesar or with any
other of the powerful in Rome sufficient to enable us to live in
safety, and above contempt and without any fear at all? and to have
God for your maker and father and guardian, shall not this release
us from sorrows and fears?

  But a man may say, "Whence shall I get bread to eat when I have
nothing?"

  And how do slaves, and runaways, on what do they rely when they
leave their masters? Do they rely on their lands or slaves, or their
vessels of silver? They rely on nothing but themselves, and food
does not fail them. And shall it be necessary for one among us who
is a philosopher to travel into foreign parts, and trust to and rely
on others, and not to take care of himself, and shall he be inferior
to irrational animals and more cowardly, each of which, being
self-sufficient, neither fails to get its proper food, nor to find a
suitable way of living, and one conformable to nature?

  I indeed think that the old man ought to be sitting here, not to
contrive how you may have no mean thoughts nor mean and ignoble talk
about yourselves, but to take care that there be not among us any
young men of such a mind that, when they have recognized their kinship
to God, and that we are fettered by these bonds, the body, I mean, and
its possessions, and whatever else on account of them is necessary
to us for the economy and commerce of life, they should intend to
throw off these things as if they were burdens painful and
intolerable, and to depart to their kinsmen. But this is the labour
that your teacher and instructor ought to be employed upon, if he
really were what he should be. You should come to him and say,
"Epictetus, we can no longer endure being bound to this poor body, and
feeding it and giving it drink, and rest, and cleaning it, and for the
sake of the body complying with the wishes of these and of those.
Are not these things indifferent and nothing to us, and is not death
no evil? And are we not in a manner kinsmen of God, and did we not
come from Him? Allow us to depart to the place from which we came;
allow us to be released at last from these bonds by which we are bound
and weighed down. Here there are robbers and thieves and courts of
justice, and those who are named tyrants, and think that they have
some power over us by means of the body and its possessions. Permit us
to show them that they have no power over any man." And I on my part
would say, "Friends, wait for God; when He shall give the signal and
release you from this service, then go to Him; but for the present
endure to dwell in this place where He has put you: short indeed is
this time of your dwelling here, and easy to bear for those who are so
disposed: for what tyrant or what thief, or what courts of justice,
are formidable to those who have thus considered as things of no value
the body and the possessions of the body? Wait then, do not depart
without a reason."

  Something like this ought to be said by the teacher to ingenuous
youths. But now what happens? The teacher is a lifeless body, and
you are lifeless bodies. When you have been well filled to-day, you
sit down and lament about the morrow, how you shall get something to
eat. Wretch, if you have it, you will have it; if you have it not, you
will depart from life. The door is open. Why do you grieve? where does
there remain any room for tears? and where is there occasion for
flattery? why shall one man envy another? why should a man admire
the rich or the powerful, even if they be both very strong and of
violent temper? for what will they do to us? We shall not care for
that which they can do; and what we do care for, that they cannot
do. How did Socrates behave with respect to these matters? Why, in
what other way than a man ought to do who was convinced that he was
a kinsman of the gods? "If you say to me now," said Socrates to his
judges, "'We will acquit you on the condition that you no longer
discourse in the way in which you have hitherto discoursed, nor
trouble either our young or our old men,' I shall answer, 'you make
yourselves ridiculous by thinking that, if one of our commanders has
appointed me to a certain post, it is my duty to keep and maintain it,
and to resolve to die a thousand times rather than desert it; but if
God has put us in any place and way of life, we ought to desert
it.'" Socrates speaks like a man who is really a kinsman of the
gods. But we think about ourselves as if we were only stomachs, and
intestines, and shameful parts; we fear, we desire; we flatter those
who are able to help us in these matters, and we fear them also.

  A man asked me to write to Rome about him, a man who, as most people
thought, had been unfortunate, for formerly he was a man of rank and
rich, but had been stripped of all, and was living here. I wrote on
his behalf in a submissive manner; but when he had read the letter, he
gave it back to me and said, "I wished for your help, not your pity:
no evil has happened to me."

  Thus also Musonius Rufus, in order to try me, used to say: "This and
this will befall you from your master"; and I replied that these
were things which happen in the ordinary course of human affairs.
"Why, then," said he, "should I ask him for anything when I can obtain
it from you?" For, in fact, what a man has from himself, it is
superfluous and foolish to receive from another? Shall I, then, who am
able to receive from myself greatness of soul and a generous spirit,
receive from you land and money or a magisterial office? I hope not: I
will not be so ignorant about my own possessions. But when a man is
cowardly and mean, what else must be done for him than to write
letters as you would about a corpse. "Please to grant us the body of a
certain person and a sextarius of poor blood." For such a person is,
in fact, a carcass and a sextarius of blood, and nothing more. But
if he were anything more, he would know that one man is not
miserable through the means of another.

  CHAPTER 10

  Against those who eagerly seek preferment at Rome

  If we applied ourselves as busily to our own work as the old men
at Rome do to those matters about which they are employed, perhaps
we also might accomplish something. I am acquainted with a man older
than myself who is now superintendent of corn at Rome, and remember
the time when he came here on his way back from exile, and what he
said as he related the events of his former life, and how he
declared that with respect to the future after his return he would
look after nothing else than passing the rest of his life in quiet and
tranquillity. "For how little of life," he said, remains for me." I
replied, "You will not do it, but as soon as you smell Rome, you
will forget all that you have said; and if admission is allowed even
into the imperial palace, you will gladly thrust yourself in and thank
God." "If you find me, Epictetus," he answered, "setting even one foot
within the palace, think what you please." Well, what then did he
do? Before he entered the city he was met by letters from Caesar,
and as soon as he received them he forgot all, and ever after has
added one piece of business to another. I wish that I were now by
his side to remind him of what he said when he was passing this way
and to tell him how much better a seer I am than he is.

  Well, then, do I say that man is an animal made for doing nothing?
Certainly not. But why are we not active? For example, as to myself,
as soon as day comes, in a few words I remind myself of what I must
read over to my pupils; then forthwith I say to myself, "But what is
it to me how a certain person shall read? the first thing for me is to
sleep." And indeed what resemblance is there between what other
persons do and what we do? If you observe what they do, you will
understand. And what else do they do all day long than make up
accounts, inquire among themselves, give and take advice about some
small quantity of grain, a bit of land, and such kind of profits? Is
it then the same thing to receive a petition and to read in it: "I
entreat you to permit me to export a small quantity of corn"; and
one to this effect: "I entreat you to learn from Chrysippus what is
the administration of the world, and what place in it the rational
animal holds; consider also who you are, and what is the nature of
your good and bad." Are these things like the other, do they require
equal care, and is it equally base to neglect these and those? Well,
then, are we the only persons who are lazy and love sleep? No; but
much rather you young men are. For we old men, when we see young men
amusing themselves, are eager to play with them; and if I saw you
active and zealous, much more should I be eager myself to join you
in your serious pursuits.

  CHAPTER 11

  Of natural affection

  When he was visited by one of the magistrates, Epictetus inquired of
him about several particulars, and asked if he had children and a
wife. The man replied that he had; and Epictetus inquired further, how
he felt under the circumstances. "Miserable," the man said. Then
Epictetus asked, "In what respect," for men do not marry and beget
children in order to be wretched, but rather to be happy. "But I," the
man replied, "am so wretched about my children that lately, when my
little daughter was sick and was supposed to be in danger, I could not
endure to stay with her, but I left home till a person sent me news
that she had recovered." Well then, said Epictetus, do you think
that you acted right? "I acted naturally," the man replied. But
convince me of this that you acted naturally, and I will convince
you that everything which takes place according to nature takes
place rightly. "This is the case," said the man, "with all or at least
most fathers." I do not deny that: but the matter about which we are
inquiring is whether such behavior is right; for in respect to this
matter we must say that tumours also come for the good of the body,
because they do come; and generally we must say that to do wrong is
natural, because nearly all or at least most of us do wrong. Do you
show me then how your behavior is natural. "I cannot," he said; "but
do you rather show me how it is not according to nature and is not
rightly done.

  Well, said Epictetus, if we were inquiring about white and black,
what criterion should we employ for distinguishing between them?
"The sight," he said. And if about hot and cold, and hard and soft,
what criterion? "The touch." Well then, since we are inquiring about
things which are according to nature, and those which are done rightly
or not rightly, what kind of criterion do you think that we should
employ? "I do not know," he said. And yet not to know the criterion of
colors and smells, and also of tastes, is perhaps no great harm; but
if a man do not know the criterion of good and bad, and of things
according to nature and contrary to nature, does this seem to you a
small harm? "The greatest harm." Come tell me, do all things which
seem to some persons to be good and becoming rightly appear such;
and at present as to Jews and Syrians and Egyptians and Romans, is
it possible that the opinions of all of them in respect to food are
right? "How is it possible?" he said. Well, I suppose it is absolutely
necessary that, if the opinions of the Egyptians are right, the
opinions of the rest must be wrong: if the opinions of the Jews are
right, those of the rest cannot be right. "Certainly." But where there
is ignorance, there also there is want of learning and training in
things which are necessary. He assented to this. You then, said
Epictetus, since you know this, for the future will employ yourself
seriously about nothing else, and will apply your mind to nothing else
than to learn the criterion of things which are according to nature,
and by using it also to determine each several thing. But in the
present matter I have so much as this to aid you toward what you wish.
Does affection to those of your family appear to you to be according
to nature and to be good? "Certainly." Well, is such affection natural
and good, and is a thing consistent with reason not good? "By no
means." Is then that which is consistent with reason in
contradiction with affection? "I think not." You are right, for if
it is otherwise, it is necessary that one of the contradictions
being according to nature, the other must be contrary to nature. Is it
not so? "It is," he said. Whatever, then, we shall discover to be at
the same time affectionate and also consistent with reason, this we
confidently declare to be right and good. "Agreed." Well then to leave
your sick child and to go away is not reasonable, and I suppose that
you will not say that it is; but it remains for us to inquire if it is
consistent with affection. "Yes, let us consider." Did you, then,
since you had an affectionate disposition to your child, do right when
you ran off and left her; and has the mother no affection for the
child? "Certainly, she has." Ought, then, the mother also to have left
her, or ought she not? "She ought not." And the nurse, does she love
her? "She does." Ought, then, she also to have left her? "By no
means." And the pedagogue, does he not love her? "He does love her."
Ought, then, he also to have deserted her? and so should the child
have been left alone and without help on account of the great
affection of you, the parents, and of those about her, or should she
have died in the hands of those who neither loved her nor cared for
her? "Certainly not." Now this is unfair and unreasonable, not to
allow those who have equal affection with yourself to do what you
think to be proper for yourself to do because you have affection. It
is absurd. Come then, if you were sick, would you wish your
relations to be so affectionate, and all the rest, children and
wife, as to leave you alone and deserted? "By no means." And would you
wish to be so loved by your own that through their excessive affection
you would always be left alone in sickness? or for this reason would
you rather pray, if it were possible, to be loved by your enemies
and deserted by them? But if this is so, it results that your behavior
was not at all an affectionate act.

  Well then, was it nothing which moved you and induced you to
desert your child? and how is that possible? But it might be something
of the kind which moved a man at Rome to wrap up his head while a
horse was running which he favoured; and when contrary to
expectation the horse won, he required sponges to recover from his
fainting fit. What then is the thing which moved? The exact discussion
of this does not belong to the present occasion perhaps; but it is
enough to be convinced of this, if what the philosophers say is
true, that we must not look for it anywhere without, but in all
cases it is one and the same thing which is the cause of our doing
or not doing something, of saying or not saying something, of being
elated or depressed, of avoiding anything or pursuing: the very
thing which is now the cause to me and to you, to you of coming to
me and sitting and hearing, and to me of saying what I do say. And
what is this? Is it any other than our will to do so? "No other."
But if we had willed otherwise, what else should we have been doing
than that which we willed to do? This, then, was the cause of
Achilles' lamentation, not the death of Patroclus; for another man
does not behave thus on the death of his companion; but it was because
he chose to do so. And to you this was the very cause of your then
running away, that you chose to do so; and on the other side, if you
should stay with her, the reason will be the same. And now you are
going to Rome because you choose; and if you should change your
mind, you will not go thither. And in a word, neither death nor
exile nor pain nor anything of the kind is the cause of our doing
anything or not doing; but our own opinions and our wills.

  Do I convince you of this or not? "You do convince me." Such,
then, as the causes are in each case, such also are the effects. When,
then, we are doing anything not rightly, from this day we shall impute
it to nothing else than to the will from which we have done it: and it
is that which we shall endeavour to take away and to extirpate more
than the tumours and abscesses out of the body. And in like manner
we shall give the same account of the cause of the things which we
do right; and we shall no longer allege as causes of any evil to us,
either slave or neighbour, or wife or children, being persuaded
that, if we do not think things to he what we do think them to be,
we do not the acts which follow from such opinions; and as to thinking
or not thinking, that is in our power and not in externals. "It is
so," he said. From this day then we shall inquire into and examine
nothing else, what its quality is, or its state, neither land nor
slaves nor horses nor dogs, nothing else than opinions. "I hope so."
You see, then, that you must become a Scholasticus, an animal whom all
ridicule, if you really intend to make an examination of your own
opinions: and that this is not the work of one hour or day, you know
yourself.

  CHAPTER 12

  Of contentment

  With respect to gods, there are some who say that a divine being
does not exist: others say that it exists, but is inactive and
careless, and takes no forethought about anything; a third class say
that such a being exists and exercises forethought, but only about
great things and heavenly things, and about nothing on the earth; a
fourth class say that a divine being exercises forethought both
about things on the earth and heavenly things, but in a general way
only, and not about things severally. There is a fifth class to whom
Ulysses and Socrates belong, who say: "I move not without thy
knowledge."

  Before all other things, then, it is necessary to inquire about each
of these opinions, whether it is affirmed truly or not truly. For if
there are no gods, how is it our proper end to follow them? And if
they exist, but take no care of anything, in this case also how will
it be right to follow them? But if indeed they do exist and look after
things, still if there is nothing communicated from them to men, nor
in fact to myself, how even so is it right? The wise and good man,
then, after considering all these things, submits his own mind to
him who administers the whole, as good citizens do to the law of the
state. He who is receiving instruction ought to come to the instructed
with this intention: How shall I follow the gods in all things, how
shall I be contented with the divine administration, and how can I
become free?" For he is free to whom everything happens according,
to his will, and whom no man can hinder. "What then, is freedom
madness?" Certainly not: for madness and freedom do not consist.
"But," you say, "I would have everything result just as I like, and in
whatever way I like." You are mad, you are beside yourself. Do you not
know that freedom is a noble and valuable thing? But for me
inconsiderately to wish for things to happen as I inconsiderately
like, this appears to be not only not noble, but even most base. For
how do we proceed in the matter of writing? Do I wish to write the
name of Dion as I choose? No, but I am taught to choose to write it as
it ought to be written. And how with respect to music? In the same
manner. And what universally in every art or science? Just the same.
If it were not so, it would be of no value to know anything, if
knowledge were adapted to every man's whim. Is it, then, in this
alone, in this which is the greatest and the chief thing, I mean
freedom, that I am permitted to will inconsiderately? By no means; but
to be instructed is this, to learn to wish that everything may
happen as it does. And how do things happen? As the disposer has
disposed them? And he has appointed summer and winter, and abundance
and scarcity, and virtue and vice, and all such opposites for the
harmony of the whole; and to each of us he has given a body, and parts
of the body, and possessions, and companions.

  Remembering, then, this disposition of things we ought to go to be
instructed, not that we may change the constitution of things- for
we have not the power to do it, nor is it better that we should have
the power-but in order that, as the things around us are what they are
and by nature exist, we may maintain our minds in harmony with them
things which happen. For can we escape from men? and how is it
possible? And if we associate with them, can we chance them? Who gives
us the power? What then remains, or what method is discovered of
holding commerce with them? Is there such a method by which they shall
do what seems fit to them, and we not the less shall be in a mood
which is conformable to nature? But you are unwilling to endure and
are discontented: and if you are alone, you call it solitude; and of
you are with men, you call them knaves and robbers; and you find fault
with your own parents and children, and brothers and neighbours. But
you ought when you are alone to call this condition by the name of
tranquillity and freedom, and to think yourself like to the gods;
and when you are with many, you ought not to call it crowd, nor
trouble, nor uneasiness, but festival and assembly, and so accept
all contentedly.

  What, then, is the punishment of those who do not accept? It is to
be what they are. Is any person dissatisfied with being alone, let him
be alone. Is a man dissatisfied with his parents? let him be a bad
son, and lament. Is he dissatisfied with his children? let him be a
bad father. "Cast him into prison." What prison? Where he is
already, for he is there against his will; and where a man is
against his will, there he is in prison. So Socrates was not in
prison, for he was there willingly. "Must my leg then be lamed?"
Wretch, do you then on account of one poor leg find fault with the
world? Will you not willingly surrender it for the whole? Will you not
withdraw from it? Will you not gladly part with it to him who gave it?
And will you be vexed and discontented with the things established
by Zeus, which he with the Moirae who were present and spinning the
thread of your generation, defined and put in order? Know you not
how small a part you are compared with the whole. I mean with
respect to the body, for as to intelligence you are not inferior to
the gods nor less; for the magnitude of intelligence is not measured
by length nor yet by height, but by thoughts.

  Will you not, then, choose to place your good in that in which you
are equal to the gods? "Wretch that I am to have such a father and
mother." What, then, was it permitted to you to come forth, and to
select, and to say: "Let such a man at this moment unite with such a
woman that I may be produced?" It was not permitted, but it was a
necessity for your parents to exist first, and then for you to be
begotten. Of what kind of parents? Of such as they were. Well then,
since they are such as they are, is there no remedy given to you?
Now if you did not know for what purpose you possess the faculty of
vision, you would be unfortunate and wretched if you closed your
eyes when colors were brought before them; but in that you possess
greatness of soul and nobility of spirit for every event that may
happen, and you know not that you possess them, are you not more
unfortunate and wretched? Things are brought close to you which are
proportionate to the power which you possess, but you turn away this
power most particularly at the very time when you ought to maintain it
open and discerning. Do you not rather thank the gods that they have
allowed you to be above these things which they have not placed in
your power; and have made you accountable only for those which are
in your power? As to your parents, the gods have left you free from
responsibility; and so with respect to your brothers, and your body,
and possessions, and death and life. For what, then, have they made
you responsible? For that which alone is in your power, the proper use
of appearances. Why then do you draw on yourself the things for
which you are not responsible? It is, indeed, a giving of trouble to
yourself.

  CHAPTER 13

  How everything may he done acceptably to the gods

  When some one asked, how may a man eat acceptably to the gods, he
answered: If he can eat justly and contentedly, and with equanimity,
and temperately and orderly, will it not be also acceptably to the
gods? But when you have asked for warm water and the slave has not
heard, or if he did hear has brought only tepid water, or he is not
even found to be in the house, then not to be vexed or to burst with
passion, is not this acceptable to the gods? "How then shall a man
endure such persons as this slave?" Slave yourself, will you not
bear with your own brother, who has Zeus for his progenitor, and is
like a son from the same seeds and of the same descent from above? But
if you have been put in any such higher place, will you immediately
make yourself a tyrant? Will you not remember who you are, and whom
you rule? that they are kinsmen, that they are brethren by nature,
that they are the offspring of Zeus? "But I have purchased them, and
they have not purchased me." Do you see in what direction you are
looking, that it is toward the earth, toward the pit, that it is
toward these wretched laws of dead men? but toward the laws of the
gods you are not looking.

  CHAPTER 14

  That the deity oversees all things

  When a person asked him how a man could be convinced that all his
actions are under the inspection of God, he answered, Do you not think
that all things are united in one? "I do," the person replied. Well,
do you not think that earthly things have a natural agreement and
union with heavenly things "I do." And how else so regularly as if
by God's command, when He bids the plants to flower, do they flower?
when He bids them to send forth shoots, do they shoot? when He bids
them to produce fruit, how else do they produce fruit? when He bids
the fruit to ripen, does it ripen? when again He bids them to cast
down the fruits, how else do they cast them down? and when to shed the
leaves, do they shed the leaves? and when He bids them to fold
themselves up and to remain quiet and rest, how else do they remain
quiet and rest? And how else at the growth and the wane of the moon,
and at the approach and recession of the sun, are so great an
alteration and change to the contrary seen in earthly things? But
are plants and our bodies so bound up and united with the whole, and
are not our souls much more? and our souls so bound up and in
contact with God as parts of Him and portions of Him; and does not God
perceive every motion of these parts as being His own motion connate
with Himself? Now are you able to think of the divine
administration, and about all things divine, and at the same time also
about human affairs, and to be moved by ten thousand things at the
same time in your senses and in your understanding, and to assent to
some, and to dissent from others, and again as to some things to
suspend your judgment; and do you retain in your soul so many
impressions from so many and various things, and being moved by
them, do you fall upon notions similar to those first impressed, and
do you retain numerous arts and the memories of ten thousand things;
and is not God able to oversee all things, and to be present with all,
and to receive from all a certain communication? And is the sun able
to illuminate so large a part of the All, and to leave so little not
illuminated, that part only which is occupied by the earth's shadow;
and He who made the sun itself and makes it go round, being a small
part of Himself compared with the whole, cannot He perceive all
things?

  "But I cannot," the man may reply, "comprehend all these things at
once." But who tells you that you have equal power with Zeus?
Nevertheless he has placed by every man a guardian, every man's Demon,
to whom he has committed the care of the man, a guardian who never
sleeps, is never deceived. For to what better and more careful
guardian could He have entrusted each of us? When, then, you have shut
the doors and made darkness within, remember never to say that you are
alone, for you are not; but God is within, and your Demon is within,
and what need have they of light to see what you are doing? To this
God you ought to swear an oath just as the soldiers do to Caesar.
But they who are hired for pay swear to regard the safety of Caesar
before all things; and you who have received so many and such great
favours, will you not swear, or when you have sworn, will you not
abide by your oath? And what shall you swear? Never to be disobedient,
never to make any charges, never to find fault with anything that he
has given, and never unwillingly to do or to suffer anything, that
is necessary. Is this oath like the soldier's oath? The soldiers swear
not to prefer any man to Caesar: in this oath men swear to honour
themselves before all.

  CHAPTER 15

  What philosophy promises

  When a man was consulting him how he should persuade his brother
to cease being angry with him, Epictetus replied: Philosophy does
not propose to secure for a man any external thing. If it did
philosophy would be allowing something which is not within its
province. For as the carpenter's material is wood, and that of the
statuary is copper, so the matter of the art of living is each man's
life. "What then is my brother's?" That again belongs to his own
art; but with respect to yours, it is one of the external things, like
a piece of land, like health, like reputation. But Philosophy promises
none of these. "In every circumstance I will maintain," she says, "the
governing part conformable to nature." Whose governing part? "His in
whom I am," she says.

  "How then shall my brother cease to be angry with me?" Bring him
to me and I will tell him. But I have nothing to say to you about
his anger.

  When the man, who was consulting him, said, "I seek to know this-
how, even if my brother is not reconciled to me, shall I maintain
myself in a state conformable to nature?" Nothing great, said
Epictetus, is produced suddenly, since not even the grape or the fig
is. If you say to me now that you want a fig, I will answer to you
that it requires time: let it flower first, then put forth fruit,
and then ripen. Is, then, the fruit of a fig-tree not perfected
suddenly and in one hour, and would you possess the fruit of a man's
mind in so short a time and so easily? Do not expect it, even if I
tell you.

  CHAPTER 16

  Of providence

  Do not wonder if for other animals than man all things are
provided for the body, not only food and drink, but beds also, and
they have no need of shoes nor bed materials, nor clothing; but we
require all these additional things. For, animals not being made for
themselves, but for service, it was not fit for them to he made so
as to need other things. For consider what it would be for us to
take care not only of ourselves, but also about cattle and asses,
how they should be clothed, and how shod, and how they should eat
and drink. Now as soldiers are ready for their commander, shod,
clothed and armed: but it would be a hard thing, for the chiliarch
to go round and shoe or clothe his thousand men; so also nature has
formed the animals which are made for service, all ready, prepared,
and requiring no further care. So one little boy with only a stick
drives the cattle.

  But now we, instead of being thankful that we need not take the same
care of animals as of ourselves, complain of God on our own account;
and yet, in the name of Zeus and the gods, any one thing of those
which exist would be enough to make a man perceive the providence of
God, at least a man who is modest and grateful. And speak not to me
now of the great thins, but only of this, that milk is produced from
grass, and cheese from milk, and wool from skins. Who made these
things or devised them? "No one," you say. Oh, amazing shamelessness
and stupidity!

  Well, let us omit the works of nature and contemplate her smaller
acts. Is there anything less useful than the hair on the chin? What
then, has not nature used this hair also in the most suitable manner
possible? Has she not by it distinguished the male and the female?
does not the nature of every man forthwith proclaim from a distance,
"I am a man; as such approach me, as such speak to me; look for
nothing else; see the signs"? Again, in the case of women, as she
has mingled something softer in the voice, so she has also deprived
them of hair (on the chin). You say: "Not so; the human animal ought
to have been left without marks of distinction, and each of us
should have been obliged to proclaim, 'I am a man.' But how is not the
sign beautiful and becoming, and venerable? how much more beautiful
than the cock's comb, how much more becoming than the lion's mane? For
this reason we ought to preserve the signs which God has given, we
ought not to throw them away, nor to confound, as much as we can,
the distinctions of the sexes.

  Are these the only works of providence in us? And what words are
sufficient to praise them and set them forth according to their worth?
For if we had understanding, ought we to do anything else both jointly
and severally than to sing hymns and bless the deity, and to tell of
his benefits? Ought we not when we are digging and ploughing and
eating to sing this hymn to God? "Great is God, who has given us
such implements with which we shall cultivate the earth: great is
God who has given us hands, the power of swallowing, a stomach,
imperceptible growth, and the power of breathing while we sleep." This
is what we ought to sing on every occasion, and to sing the greatest
and most divine hymn for giving us the faculty of comprehending
these things and using a proper way. Well then, since most of you have
become blind, ought there not to be some man to fill this office,
and on behalf of all to sing the hymn to God? For what else can I
do, a lame old man, than sing hymns to God? If then I was a
nightingale, I would do the part of a nightingale: if I were a swan, I
would do like a swan. But now I am a rational creature, and I ought to
praise God: this is my work; I do it, nor will I desert this post,
so long as I am allowed to keep it; and I exhort you to join in this
same song.

  CHAPTER 17

  That the logical art is necessary

  Since reason is the faculty which analyses and perfects the rest,
and it ought itself not to be unanalysed, by what should it be
analysed? for it is plain that this should be done either by itself or
by another thing. Either, then, this other thing also is reason, or
something else superior to reason; which is impossible. But if it is
reason, again who shall analyse that reason? For if that reason does
this for itself, our reason also can do it. But we shall require
something else, the thing, will go on to infinity and have no end.
Reason therefore is analysed by itself. "Yes: but it is more urgent to
cure (our opinions) and the like." Will you then hear about those
things? Hear. But if you should say, "I know not whether you are
arguing truly or falsely," and if I should express myself in any way
ambiguously, and you should say to me, " Distinguish," I will bear
with you no longer, and I shall say to "It is more urgent." This is
the reason, I suppose, why they place the logical art first, as in the
measuring of corn we place first the examination of the measure. But
if we do not determine first what is a modius, and what is a
balance, how shall we be able to measure or weigh anything?

  In this case, then, if we have not fully learned and accurately
examined the criterion of all other things, by which the other
things are learned, shall we be able to examine accurately and to
learn fully anything else? "Yes; but the modius is only wood, and a
thing which produces no fruit." But it is a thing which can measure
corn. "Logic also produces no fruit." As to this indeed we shall
see: but then even if a man should rant this, it is enough that
logic has the power of distinguishing and examining other things, and,
as we may say, of measuring and weighing them. Who says this? Is it
only Chrysippus, and Zeno, and Cleanthes? And does not Antisthenes say
so? And who is it that has written that the examination of names is
the beginning of education? And does not Socrates say so? And of
whom does Xenophon write, that he began with the examination of names,
what each name signified? Is this then the great and wondrous thing to
understand or interpret Chrysippus? Who says this? What then is the
wondrous thing? To understand the will of nature. Well then do you
apprehend it yourself by your own power? and what more have you need
of? For if it is true that all men err involuntarily, and you have
learned the truth, of necessity you must act right. "But in truth I do
not apprehend the will of nature." Who then tells us what it is?
They say that it is Chrysippus. I proceed, and I inquire what this
interpreter of nature says. I begin not to understand what he says;
I seek an interpreter of Chrysippus. "Well, consider how this is said,
just as if it were said in the Roman tongue." What then is this
superciliousness of the interpreter? There is no superciliousness
which can justly he charged even to Chrysippus, if he only
interprets the will of nature, but does not follow it himself; and
much more is this so with his interpreter. For we have no need of
Chrysippus for his own sake, but in order that we may understand
nature. Nor do we need a diviner on his own account, but because we
think that through him we shall know the future and understand the
signs given by the gods; nor do we need the viscera of animals for
their own sake, but because through them signs are given; nor do we
look with wonder on the crow or raven, but on God, who through them
gives signs?

  I go then to the interpreter of these things and the sacrificer, and
I say, "Inspect the viscera for me, and tell me what signs they give."
The man takes the viscera, opens them, and interprets them: "Man,"
he says, "you have a will free by nature from hindrance and
compulsion; this is written here in the viscera. I will show you
this first in the matter of assent. Can any man hinder you from
assenting to the truth? No man can. Can any man compel you to
receive what is false? No man can. You see that in this matter you
have the faculty of the will free from hindrance, free from
compulsion, unimpeded." Well, then, in the matter of desire and
pursuit of an object, is it otherwise? And what can overcome pursuit
except another pursuit? And what can overcome desire and aversion
except another desire and aversion? But, you object: "If you place
before me the fear of death, you do compel me." No, it is not what
is placed before you that compels, but your opinion that it is
better to do so-and-so than to die. In this matter, then, it is your
opinion that compelled you: that is, will compelled will. For if God
had made that part of Himself, which He took from Himself and gave
to us, of such a nature as to be hindered or compelled either by
Himself or by another, He would not then be God nor would He be taking
care of us as He ought. "This," says the diviner, "I find in the
victims: these are the things which are signified to you. If you
choose, you are free; if you choose, you will blame no one: you will
charge no one. All will be at the same time according to your mind and
the mind of God." For the sake of this divination I go to this diviner
and to the philosopher, not admiring him for this interpretation,
but admiring the things which he interprets.

  CHAPTER 18

  That we ought not to he angry with the errors of others

  If what philosophers say is true, that all men have one principle,
as in the case of assent the persuasion that a thing is so, and in the
case of dissent the persuasion that a thing is not so, and in the case
of a suspense of judgment the persuasion that a thing is uncertain, so
also in the case of a movement toward anything the persuasion that a
thing is for a man's advantage, and it is impossible to think that one
thing is advantageous and to desire another, and to judge one thing to
be proper and to move toward another, why then are we angry with the
many? "They are thieves and robbers," you may say. What do you mean by
thieves and robbers? "They are mistaken about good and evil." Ought we
then to be angry with them, or to pity them? But show them their
error, and you will see how they desist from their errors. If they
do not see their errors, they have nothing superior to their present
opinion.

  "Ought not then this robber and this adulterer to be destroyed?"
By no means say so, but speak rather in this way: "This man who has
been mistaken and deceived about the most important things, and
blinded, not in the faculty of vision which distinguishes white and
black, but in the faculty which distinguishes good and bad, should
we not destroy him?" If you speak thus, you will see how inhuman
this is which you say, and that it is just as if you would say, "Ought
we not to destroy this blind and deaf man?" But if the greatest harm
is the privation of the greatest things, and the greatest thing in
every man is the will or choice such as it ought to be, and a man is
deprived of this will, why are you also angry with him? Man, you ought
not to be affected contrary to nature by the bad things of another.
Pity him rather: drop this readiness to be offended and to hate, and
these words which the many utter: "These accursed and odious fellows."
How have you been made so wise at once? and how are you so peevish?
Why then are we angry? Is it because we value so much the things of
which these men rob us? Do not admire your clothes, and then you
will not be angry with the thief. Do not admire the beauty of your
wife, and you will not be angry with the adulterer. Learn that a thief
and an adulterer have no place in the things which are yours, but in
those which belong to others and which are not in your power. If you
dismiss these things and consider them as nothing, with whom are you
still angry? But so long as you value these things, be angry with
yourself rather than with the thief and the adulterer. Consider the
matter thus: you have fine clothes; your neighbor has not: you have
a window; you wish to air the clothes. The thief does not know wherein
man's good consists, but he thinks that it consists in having fine
clothes, the very thing which you also think. Must he not then come
and take them away? When you show a cake to greedy persons, and
swallow it all yourself, do you expect them not to snatch it from you?
Do not provoke them: do not have a window: do not air your clothes.
I also lately had an iron lamp placed by the side of my household
gods: hearing a noise at the door, I ran down, and found that the lamp
had been carried off. I reflected that he who had taken  the lamp
had done nothing strange. What then? To-morrow, I said, you will
find an earthen lamp: for a man only loses that which he has. "I
have lost my garment." The reason is that you had a garment. "I have
pain in my head." Have you any pain in your horns? Why then are you
troubled? for we only lose those things, we have only pains about
those things which we possess.

  "But the tyrant will chain." What? the leg. "He will take away."
What? the neck. What then will he not chain and not take away? the
will. This is why the ancients taught the maxim, "Know thyself."
Therefore we ought to exercise ourselves in small things and,
beginning with them, to proceed to the greater. "I have pain in the
head." Do not say, "Alas!" "I have pain in the ear." Do not say,
"Alas!" And I do not say that you are not allowed to groan, but do not
groan inwardly; and if your slave is slow in bringing a bandage, do
not cry out and torment yourself, and say, "Everybody hates me": for
who would not hate such a man? For the future, relying on these
opinions, walk about upright, free; not trusting to the size of your
body, as an athlete, for a man ought not to be invincible in the way
that an ass is.

  Who then is the invincible? It is he whom none of the things disturb
which are independent of the will. Then examining one circumstance
after another I observe, as in the case of an athlete; he has come off
victorious in the first contest: well then, as to the second? and what
if there should be great heat? and what, if it should be at Olympia?
And the same I say in this case: if you should throw money in his way,
he will despise it. Well, suppose you put a young girl in his way,
what then? and what, if it is in the dark? what if it should be a
little reputation, or abuse; and what, if it should be praise; and
what if it should be death? He is able to overcome all. What then if
it be in heat, and what if it is in the rain, and what if he be in a
melancholy mood, and what if he be asleep? He will still conquer. This
is my invincible athlete.

  CHAPTER 19

  How we should behave to tyrants

  If a man possesses any superiority, or thinks that he does, when
he does not, such a man, if he is uninstructed, will of necessity be
puffed up through it. For instance, the tyrant says, "I am master of
all." And what can you do for me? Can you give me desire which shall
have no hindrance? How can you? Have you the infallible power of
avoiding what you would avoid? Have you the power of moving toward
an object without error? And how do you possess this power? Come, when
you are in a ship, do you trust to yourself or to the helmsman? And
when you are in a chariot, to whom do you trust but to the driver? And
how is it in all other arts? Just the same. In what then lies your
power? "All men pay respect to me." Well, I also pay respect to my
platter, and I wash it and wipe it; and for the sake of my oil
flask, I drive a peg into the wall. Well then, are these things
superior to me? No, but they supply some of my wants, and for this
reason I take care of them. Well, do I not attend to my ass? Do I
not wash his feet? Do I not clean him? Do you not know that every
man has regard to himself, and to you just the same as he has regard
to his ass? For who has regard to you as a man? Show me. Who wishes to
become like you? Who imitates you, as he imitates Socrates? "But I can
cut off your head." You say right. I had forgotten that I must have
regard to you, as I would to a fever and the bile, and raise an
altar to you, as there is at Rome an altar to fever.

  What is it then that disturbs and terrifies the multitude? is it the
tyrant and his guards? I hope that it is not so. It is not possible
that what is by nature free can be disturbed by anything else, or
hindered by any other thing than by itself. But it is a man's own
opinions which disturb him: for when the tyrant says to a man, "I will
chain your leg," he who values his leg says, "Do not; have pity":
but he who values his own will says, "If it appears more
advantageous to you, chain it." "Do you not care?" I do not care. "I
will show you that I am master." You cannot do that. Zeus has set me
free: do you think that he intended to allow his own son to be
enslaved? But you are master of my carcass: take it. "So when you
approach me, you have no regard to me?" No, but I have regard to
myself; and if you wish me to say that I have regard to you also, I
tell you that I have the same regard to you that I have to my pipkin.

  This is not a perverse self-regard, for the animal is constituted so
as to do all things for itself. For even the sun does all things for
itself; nay, even Zeus himself. But when he chooses to be the Giver of
rain and the Giver of fruits, and the Father of gods and men, you
see that he cannot obtain these functions and these names, if he is
not useful to man; and, universally, he has made the nature of the
rational animal such that it cannot obtain any one of its own proper
interests, if it does not contribute something to the common interest.
In this manner and sense it is not unsociable for a man to do
everything, for the sake of himself. For what do you expect? that a
man should neglect himself and his own interest? And how in that
case can there be one and the same principle in all animals, the
principle of attachment to themselves?

  What then? when absurd notions about things independent of our will,
as if they were good and bad, lie at the bottom of our opinions, we
must of necessity pay regard to tyrants; for I wish that men would pay
regard to tyrants only, and not also to the bedchamber men. How is
it that the man becomes all at once wise, when Caesar has made him
superintendent of the close stool? How is it that we say
immediately, "Felicion spoke sensibly to me." I wish he were ejected
from the bedchamber, that he might again appear to you to be a fool.

  Epaphroditus had a shoemaker whom he sold because he was good for
nothing. This fellow by some good luck was bought by one of Caesar's
men, and became Caesar's shoemaker. You should have seen what
respect Epaphroditus paid to him: "How does the good Felicion do, I
pray?" Then if any of us asked, "What is master doing?" the answer "He
is consulting about something with Felicion." Had he not sold the
man as good for nothing? Who then made him wise all at once? This is
an instance of valuing something else than the things which depend
on the will.

  Has a man been exalted to the tribuneship? All who meet him offer
their congratulations; one kisses his eyes, another the neck, and
the slaves kiss his hands. He goes to his house, he finds torches
lighted. He ascends the Capitol: he offers a sacrifice of the
occasion. Now who ever sacrificed for having had good desires? for
having acted conformably to nature? For in fact we thank the gods
for those things in which we place our good.

  A person was talking to me to-day about the priesthood of
Augustus. I say to him: "Man, let the thing alone: you will spend much
for no purpose." But he replies, "Those who draw up agreements will
write any name." Do you then stand by those who read them, and say
to such persons, "It is I whose name is written there;" And if you can
now be present on all such occasions, what will you do when you are
dead? "My name will remain." Write it on a stone, and it will
remain. But come, what remembrance of you will there be beyond
Nicopolis? "But I shall wear a crown of gold." If you desire a crown
at all, take a crown of roses and put it on, for it will be more
elegant in appearance.

  CHAPTER 20

  About reason, how it contemplates itself

  Every art and faculty contemplates certain things especially. When
then it is itself of the same kind with the objects which it
contemplates, it must of necessity contemplate itself also: but when
it is of an unlike kind, it cannot contemplate itself. For instance,
the shoemaker's art is employed on skins, but itself is entirely
distinct from the material of skins: for this reason it does not
contemplate itself. Again, the grammarian's art is employed about
articulate speech; is then the art also articulate speech? By no
means. For this reason it is not able to contemplate itself. Now
reason, for what purpose has it been given by nature? For the right
use of appearances. What is it then itself? A system of certain
appearances. So by its nature it has the faculty of contemplating
itself so. Again, sound sense, for the contemplation of what things
does it belong to us? Good and evil, and things which are neither.
What is it then itself? Good. And want of sense, what is it? Evil.
Do you see then that good sense necessarily contemplates both itself
and the opposite? For this reason it is the chief and the first work
of a philosopher to examine appearances, and to distinguish them,
and to admit none without examination. You see even in the matter of
coin, in which our interest appears to be somewhat concerned, how we
have invented an art, and how many means the assayer uses to try the
value of coin, the sight, the touch, the smell, and lastly the
hearing. He throws the coin down, and observes the sound, and he is
not content with its sounding once, but through his great attention he
becomes a musician. In like manner, where we think that to be mistaken
and not to be mistaken make a great difference, there we apply great
attention to discovering the things which can deceive. But in the
matter of our miserable ruling faculty, yawning and sleeping, we
carelessly admit every appearance, for the harm is not noticed.

  When then you would know how careless you are with respect to good
and evil, and how active with respect to things which are indifferent,
observe how you feel with respect to being deprived of the sight of
eyes, and how with respect of being deceived, and you will discover
you are far from feeling as you ought to in relation to good and evil.
"But this is a matter which requires much preparation, and much
labor and study." Well then do you expect to acquire the greatest of
arts with small labor? And yet the chief doctrine of philosophers is
brief. If you would know, read Zeno's writings and you will see. For
how few words it requires to say man's end is to follow the god's, and
that the nature of good is a proper use of appearances. But if you say
"What is 'God,' what is 'appearance,' and what is 'particular' and
what is 'universal nature'? then indeed many words are necessary. If
then Epicures should come and say that the good must be in the body;
in this case also many words become necessary, and we must be taught
what is the leading principle in us, and the fundamental and the
substantial; and as it is not probable that the good of a snail is
in the shell, is it probable that the good of a man is in the body?
But you yourself, Epicurus, possess something better than this. What
is that in you which deliberates, what is that which examines
everything, what is that which forms a judgement about the body
itself, that it is the principle part? and why do you light your
lamp and labor for us, and write so many books? is it that we may
not be ignorant of the truth, who we are, and what we are with respect
to you? Thus the discussion requires many words.

  CHAPTER 21

  Against those who wish to be admired

  When a man holds his proper station in life, he does not gape
after things beyond it. Man, what do you wish to happen to you? "I
am satisfied if I desire and avoid conformably to nature, if I
employ movements toward and from an object as I am by nature formed to
do, and purpose and design and assent." Why then do you strut before
us as if you had swallowed a spit? "My wish has always been that those
who meet me should admire me, and those who follow me should
exclaim, 'Oh, the great philosopher.'" Who are they by whom you wish
to be admired? Are they not those of whom you are used to say that
they are mad? Well then do you wish to be admired by madmen?

  CHAPTER 22

  On precognitions

  Precognitions are common to all men, and precognition is not
contradictory to precognition. For who of us does not assume that Good
is useful and eligible, and in all circumstances that we ought to
follow and pursue it? And who of us does not assume that justice is
beautiful and becoming? When, then, does the contradiction arise? It
arises in the adaptation of the precognitions to the particular cases.
When one man says, "He has done well: he is a brave man," and
another says, "Not so; but he has acted foolishly"; then the
disputes arise among men. This is the dispute among the Jews and the
Syrians and the Egyptians and the Romans; not whether holiness
should be preferred to all things and in all cases should be
pursued, but whether it is holy to eat pig's flesh or not holy. You
will find this dispute also between Agamemnon and Achilles; for call
them forth. What do you say, Agamemnon ought not that to be done which
is proper and right? "Certainly." Well, what do you say, Achilles?
do you not admit that what is good ought to be done? "I do most
certainly." Adapt your precognitions then to the present matter.
Here the dispute begins. Agamemnon says, "I ought not to give up
Chryseis to her father." Achilles says, "You ought." It is certain
that one of the two makes a wrong adaptation of the precognition of
ought" or "duty." Further, Agamemnon says, "Then if I ought to restore
Chryseis, it is fit that I take his prize from some of you."
Achilles replies, "Would you then take her whom I love?" "Yes, her
whom you love." "Must I then be the only man who goes without a prize?
and must I be the only man who has no prize?" Thus the dispute begins.

  What then is education? Education is the learning how to adapt the
natural precognitions to the particular things conformably to
nature; and then to distinguish that of things some are in our
power, but others are not; in our power are will and all acts which
depend on the will; things not in our power are the body, the parts of
the body, possessions, parents, brothers, children, country, and,
generally, all with whom we live in society. In what, then, should
we place the good? To what kind of things shall we adapt it? "To the
things which are in our power?" Is not health then a good thing, and
soundness of limb, and life? and are not children and parents and
country? Who will tolerate you if you deny this?

  Let us then transfer the notion of good to these things. is it
possible, then, when a man sustains damage and does not obtain good
things, that he can be happy? "It is not possible." And can he
maintain toward society a proper behavior? He cannot. For I am
naturally formed to look after my own interest. If it is my interest
to have an estate in land, it is my interest also to take it from my
neighbor. If it is my interest to have a garment, it is my interest
also to steal it from the bath. This is the origin of wars, civil
commotions, tyrannies, conspiracies. And how shall I be still able
to maintain my duty toward Zeus? for if I sustain damage and am
unlucky, he takes no care of me; and what is he to me if he allows
me to be in the condition in which I am? I now begin to hate him. Why,
then, do we build temples, why set up statues to Zeus, as well as to
evil demons, such as to Fever; and how is Zeus the Saviour, and how
the Giver of rain, and the Giver of fruits? And in truth if we place
the nature of Good in any such things, all this follows.

  What should we do then? This is the inquiry of the true
philosopher who is in labour. "Now I do not see what the Good is nor
the Bad. Am I not mad? Yes." But suppose that I place the good
somewhere among the things which depend on the will: all will laugh at
me. There will come some grey-head wearing many gold rings on his
fingers and he will shake his head and say, "Hear, my child. It is
right that you should philosophize; but you ought to have some
brains also: all this that you are doing is silly. You learn the
syllogism from philosophers; but you know how to act better than
philosophers do." Man, why then do you blame me, if I know? What shall
I say to this slave? If I am silent, he will burst. I must speak in
this way: "Excuse me, as you would excuse lovers: I am not my own
master: I am mad."

  CHAPTER 23

  Against Epicurus

  Even Epicurus perceives that we are by nature social, but having
once placed our good in the husk he is no longer able to say
anything else. For on the other hand he strongly maintains this,
that we ought not to admire nor to accept anything which is detached
from the nature of good; and he is right in maintaining this. How then
are we [suspicious], if we have no natural affection to our
children? Why do you advise the wise man not to bring up children? Why
are you afraid that he may thus fall into trouble? For does he fall
into trouble on account of the mouse which is nurtured in the house?
What does he care if a little mouse in the house makes lamentation
to him? But Epicurus knows that if once a child is born, it is no
longer in our power not to love it nor care about it. For this reason,
Epicurus says that a man who has any sense also does not engage in
political matters; for he knows what a man must do who is engaged in
such things; for, indeed, if you intend to behave among men as you
do among a swarm of flies, what hinders you? But Epicurus, who knows
this, ventures to say that we should not bring up children. But a
sheep does not desert its own offspring, nor yet a wolf; and shall a
man desert his child? What do you mean? that we should be as silly
as sheep? but not even do they desert their offspring: or as savage as
wolves, but not even do wolves desert their young. Well, who would
follow your advice, if he saw his child weeping after falling on the
ground? For my part I think that, even if your mother and your
father had been told by an oracle that you would say what you have
said, they would not have cast you away.

  CHAPTER 24

  How we should struggle with circumstances

  It is circumstances which show what men are. Therefore when a
difficulty falls upon you, remember that God, like a trainer of
wrestlers, has matched you with a rough young man. "For what purpose?"
you may say, Why, that you may become an Olympic conqueror; but it
is not accomplished without sweat. In my opinion no man has had a more
profitable difficulty than you have had, if you choose to make use
of it as an athlete would deal with a young antagonist. We are now
sending a scout to Rome; but no man sends a cowardly scout, who, if he
only hears a noise and sees a shadow anywhere, comes running back in
terror and reports that the enemy is close at hand. So now if you
should come and tell us, "Fearful is the state of affairs at Rome,
terrible is death, terrible is exile; terrible is calumny; terrible is
poverty; fly, my friends; the enemy is near"; we shall answer,
"Begone, prophesy for yourself; we have committed only one fault, that
we sent such a scout."

  Diogenes, who was sent as a scout before you, made a different
report to us. He says that death is no evil, for neither is it base:
he says that fame is the noise of madmen. And what has this spy said
about pain, about pleasure, and about poverty? He says that to be
naked is better than any purple robe, and to sleep on the bare
ground is the softest bed; and he gives as a proof of each thing
that he affirms his own courage, his tranquillity his freedom, and the
healthy appearance and compactness of his body. "There is no enemy
he says; "all is peace." How so, Diogenes? "See," he replies, "if I am
struck, if I have been wounded, if I have fled from any man." This
is what a scout ought to be. But you come to us and tell us one
thing after another. Will you not go back, and you will see clearer
when you have laid aside fear?

  What then shall I do? What do you do when you leave a ship? Do you
take away the helm or the oars? What then do you take away? You take
what is your own, your bottle and your wallet; and now if you think of
what is your own, you will never claim what belongs to others. The
emperor says, "Lay aside your laticlave." See, I put on the
angusticlave. "Lay aside this also." See, I have only my toga. "Lay
aside your toga." See, I am naked. "But you still raise my envy." Take
then all my poor body; when, at a man's command, I can throw away my
poor body, do I still fear him?

  "But a certain person will not leave to me the succession to his
estate." What then? had I forgotten that not one of these things was
mine. How then do we call them mine? just as we call the bed in the
inn. If, then, the innkeeper at his death leaves you the beds, all
well; but if he leaves them to another, he will have them, and you
will seek another bed. If then you shall not find one, you will
sleep on the ground: only sleep with a good will and snore, and
remember that tragedies have their place among the rich and kings
and tyrants, but no poor man fills a part in the tragedy, except as
one of the chorus. Kings indeed commence with prosperity: "ornament
the palaces with garlands," then about the third or fourth act they
call out, "O Cithaeron, why didst thou receive me?" Slave, where are
the crowns, where the diadem? The guards help thee not at all. When
then you approach any of these persons, remember this that you are
approaching a tragedian, not the actor but OEdipus himself. But you
say, "Such a man is happy; for he walks about with many," and I also
place myself with the many and walk about with many. In sum remember
this: the door is open; be not more timid than little children, but as
they say, when the thing does not please them, "I will play no loner,"
so do you, when things seem to you of such a kind, say I will no
longer play, and begone: but if you stay, do not complain.

  CHAPTER 25

  On the same

  If these things are true, and if we are not silly, and are not
acting hypocritically when we say that the good of man is in the will,
and the evil too, and that everything else does not concern us, why
are we still disturbed, why are we still afraid? The things about
which we have been busied are in no man's power: and the things
which are in the power of others, we care not for. What kind of
trouble have we still?

  "But give me directions." Why should I give you directions? has
not Zeus given you directions? Has he not given to you what is your
own free from hindrance and free from impediment, and what is not your
own subject to hindrance and impediment? What directions then, what
kind of orders did you bring when you came from him? Keep by every
means what is your own; do not desire what belongs to others. Fidelity
is your own, virtuous shame is your own; who then can take these
things from you? who else than yourself will hinder you from using
them? But how do you act? when you seek what is not your own, you lose
that which is your own. Having such promptings and commands from Zeus,
what kind do you still ask from me? Am I more powerful than he, am I
more worthy of confidence? But if you observe these, do you want any
others besides? "Well, but he has not given these orders" you will
say. Produce your precognitions, produce the proofs of philosophers,
produce what you have often heard, and produce what you have said
yourself, produce what you have read, produce what you have
meditated on (and you will then see that all these things are from
God). How long, then, is it fit to observe these precepts from God,
and not to break up the play? As long as the play is continued with
propriety. In the Saturnalia a king is chosen by lot, for it has
been the custom to play at this game. The king commands: "Do you
drink," "Do you mix the wine," "Do you sing," "Do you go," "Do you
come." I obey that the game may be broken up through me. But if he
says, "Think that you are in evil plight": I answer, "I do not think
so"; and who compel me to think so? Further, we agreed to play
Agamemnon and Achilles. He who is appointed to play Agamemnon says
to me, "Go to Achilles and tear from him Briseis." I go. He says,
"Come," and I come.

  For as we behave in the matter of hypothetical arguments, so ought
we to do in life. "Suppose it to be night." I suppose that it is
night. "Well then; is it day?" No, for I admitted the hypothesis
that it was night. "Suppose that you think that it is night?"
Suppose that I do. "But also think that it is night." That is not
consistent with the hypothesis. So in this case also: "Suppose that
you are unfortunate." Well, suppose so. "Are you then unhappy?" Yes.
"Well, then, are you troubled with an unfavourable demon?" Yes. "But
think also that you are in misery." This is not consistent with the
hypothesis; and Another forbids me to think so.

  How long then must we obey such orders? As long as it is profitable;
and this means as long as I maintain that which is becoming and
consistent. Further, some men are sour and of bad temper, and they
say, "I cannot sup with this man to be obliged to hear him telling
daily how he fought in Mysia: 'I told you, brother, how I ascended the
hill: then I began to be besieged again.'" But another says, "I prefer
to get my supper and to hear him talk as much as he likes." And do you
compare these estimates: only do nothing in a depressed mood, nor as
one afflicted, nor as thinking that you are in misery, for no man
compels you to that. Has it smoked in the chamber? If the smoke is
moderate, I will stay; if it is excessive, I go out: for you must
always remember this and hold it fast, that the door is open. Well,
but you say to me, "Do not live in Nicopolis." I will not live
there. "Nor in Athens." I will not live in Athens. "Nor in Rome." I
will not live in Rome. "Live in Gyarus." I will live in Gyarus, but it
seems like a great smoke to live in Gyarus; and I depart to the
place where no man will hinder me from living, for that dwelling-place
is open to all; and as to the last garment, that is the poor body,
no one has any power over me beyond this. This was the reason why
Demetrius said to Nero, "You threaten me with death, but nature
threatens you." If I set my admiration on the poor body, I have
given myself up to be a slave: if on my little possessions, I also
make myself a slave: for I immediately make it plain with what I may
be caught; as if the snake draws in his head, I tell you to strike
that part of him which he guards; and do you he assured that
whatever part you choose to guard, that part your master will
attack. Remembering this, whom will you still flatter or fear?

  "But I should like to sit where the Senators sit." Do you see that
you are putting yourself in straits, you are squeezing yourself.
"How then shall I see well in any other way in the amphitheatre?" Man,
do not be a spectator at all; and you will not be squeezed. Why do you
give yourself trouble? Or wait a little, and when the spectacle is
over, seat yourself in the place reserved for the Senators and sun
yourself. For remember this general truth, that it is we who squeeze
ourselves, who put ourselves in straits; that is, our opinions squeeze
us and put us in straits. For what is it to be reviled? Stand by a
stone and revile it; and what will you gain? If, then, a man listens
like a stone, what profit is there to the reviler? But if the
reviler has as a stepping-stone the weakness of him who is reviled,
then he accomplishes something. "Strip him." What do you mean by
"him"? Lay hold of his garment, strip it off. "I have insulted you."
Much good may it do you.

  This was the practice of Socrates: this was the reason why he always
had one face. But we choose to practice and study anything rather than
the means by which we shall be unimpeded and free. You say,
"Philosophers talk paradoxes." But are there no paradoxes in the other
arts? and what is more paradoxical than to puncture a man's eye in
order that he may see? If any one said this to a man ignorant of the
surgical art, would he not ridicule the speaker? Where is the wonder
then if in philosophy also many things which are true appear
paradoxical to the inexperienced?

  CHAPTER 26

  What is the law of life

  When a person was reading hypothetical arguments, Epictetus said:
This also is an hypothetical law that we must accept what follows from
the hypothesis. But much before this law is the law of life, that we
must act conformably to nature. For if in every matter and
circumstance we wish to observe what is natural, it is plain that in
everything we ought to make it our aim that is consequent shall not
escape us, and that we do not admit the contradictory. First, then,
philosophers exercise us in theory, which is easier; and then next
they lead us to the more difficult things; for in theory, there is
nothing which draws us away from following what is taught; but in
the matters of life, many are the things which distract us. He is
ridiculous, then, who says that he wishes to begin with the matters of
real life, for it is not easy to begin with the more difficult things;
and we ought to employ this fact as an argument to those parents who
are vexed at their children learning philosophy: "Am I doing wrong
then, my father, and do I not know what is suitable to me and
becoming? If indeed this can neither be learned nor taught, why do you
blame me? but if it can he taught, teach me; and if you cannot,
allow me to learn from those who say that they know how to teach.
For what do you think? do you suppose that I voluntarily fall into
evil and miss the good? I hope that it may not be so. What is then the
cause of my doing wrong? Ignorance. Do you not choose then that I
should get rid of my ignorance? Who was ever taught by anger the art
of a pilot or music? Do you think then that by means of your anger I
shall learn the art of life?" He only is allowed to speak in this
way who has shown such an intention. But if a man only intending to
make a display at a banquet and to show that he is acquainted with
hypothetical arguments reads them and attends the philosophers, what
other object has he than that some man of senatorian rank who sits
by him may admire? For there are the really great materials, and the
riches here appear to be trifles there. This is the reason why it is
difficult for a man to be master of the appearances, where the
things which disturb the judgement are great. I know a certain
person who complained, as he embraced the knees of Epaphroditus,
that he had only one hundred and fifty times ten thousand denarii
remaining. What then did Epaphroditus do? Did he laugh at him, as we
slaves of Epaphroditus did? No, but he cried out with amazement, "Poor
man, how did you keep silence, how did you endure it?"

  When Epictetus had reproved the person who was reading the
hypothetical arguments, and the teacher who had suggested the
reading was laughing at the reader, Epictetus said to the teacher:
"You are laughing at yourself; you did not prepare the young man nor
did you ascertain whether he was able to understand these matters; but
perhaps you are only employing him as a reader." Well then, said
Epictetus, if a man has not ability enough to understand a complex, do
we trust him in, giving praise, do we trust him in giving blame, do we
allow that he is able to form a judgement about good or bad? and if
such a man blames any one, does the man care for the blame? and if
he praises any one, is the man elated, when in such small matters as
an hypothetical syllogism he who praises cannot see what is consequent
on the hypothesis?

  This then is the beginning of philosophy, a man's perception of
the state of his ruling faculty; for when a man knows that it is weak,
then he will not employ it on things of the greatest difficulty. But
at present, if men cannot swallow even a morsel, they buy whole
volumes and attempt to devour them; and this is the reason why they
vomit them up or suffer indigestion: and then come gripings, defluxes,
and fevers. Such men ought to consider what their ability is. In
theory it is easy to convince an ignorant person; but in the affairs
of real life no one offers himself to be convinced, and we hate the
man who has convinced us. But Socrates advised us not to live a life
which is not subjected to examination.

  CHAPTER 27

  In how many ways appearances exist, and what aids we should
provide against them

  Appearances to us in four ways: for either things appear as they
are; or they are not, and do not even appear to be; or they are, and
do not appear to be; or they are not, and yet appear to be. Further,
in all these cases to form a right judgement is the office of an
educated man. But whatever it is that annoys us, to that we ought to
apply a remedy. If the sophisms of Pyrrho and of the Academics are
what annoys, we must apply the remedy to them. If it is the persuasion
of appearances, by which some things appear to be good, when they
are not good, let us seek a remedy for this. If it is habit which
annoys us, we must try to seek aid against habit. What aid then can we
find against habit, The contrary habit. You hear the ignorant say:
"That unfortunate person is dead: his father and mother are
overpowered with sorrow; he was cut off by an untimely death and in
a foreign land." Here the contrary way of speaking: tear yourself from
these expressions: oppose to one habit the contrary habit; to
sophistry oppose reason, and the exercise and discipline of reason;
against persuasive appearances we ought to have manifest
precognitions, cleared of all impurities and ready to hand.

  When death appears an evil, we ought to have this rule in readiness,
that it is fit to avoid evil things, and that death is a necessary
thing. For what shall I do, and where shall I escape it? Suppose
that I am not Sarpedon, the son of Zeus, nor able to speak in this
noble way: "I will go and I am resolved either to behave bravely
myself or to give to another the opportunity of doing so; if I
cannot succeed in doing anything myself, I will not grudge another the
doing of something noble." Suppose that it is above our power to act
thus; is it not in our power to reason thus? Tell me where I can
escape death: discover for me the country, show me the men to whom I
must go, whom death does not visit. Discover to me a charm against
death. If I have not one, what do you wish me to do? I cannot escape
from death. Shall I not escape from the fear of death, but shall I die
lamenting and trembling? For the origin of perturbation is this, to
wish for something, and that this should not happen. Therefore if I am
able to change externals according to my wish, I change them; but if I
cannot, I am ready to tear out the eyes of him who hinders me. For the
nature of man is not to endure to be deprived of the good, and not
to endure the falling into the evil. Then, at last, when I am
neither able to change circumstances nor to tear out the eyes of him
who hinders me, I sit down and groan, and abuse whom I can, Zeus and
the rest of the gods. For if they do not care for me, what are they to
me? "Yes, but you will be an impious man." In what respect then will
it be worse for me than it is now? To sum up, remember this that
unless piety and your interest be in the same thing, piety cannot be
maintained in any man. Do not these things seem necessary?

  Let the followers of Pyrrho and the Academics come and make their
objections. For I, as to my part, have no leisure for these
disputes, nor am I able to undertake the defense of common consent. If
I had a suit even about a bit of land, I would call in another to
defend my interests. With what evidence then am I satisfied? With that
which belongs to the matter in hand. How indeed perception is
effected, whether through the whole body or any part, perhaps I cannot
explain: for both opinions perplex me. But that you and I are not
the same, I know with perfect certainty. "How do you know it?" When
I intend to swallow anything, I never carry it to your b month, but to
my own. When I intend to take bread, I never lay hold of a broom,
but I always go to the bread as to a mark. And you yourselves who take
away the evidence of the senses, do you act otherwise? Who among
you, when he intended to enter a bath, ever went into a mill?

  What then? Ought we not with all our power to hold to this also, the
maintaining of general opinion, and fortifying ourselves against the
arguments which are directed against it? Who denies that we ought to
do this? Well, he should do it who is able, who has leisure for it;
but as to him who trembles and is perturbed and is inwardly broken
in heart, he must employ his time better on something else.

  CHAPTER 28

  That we ought not to he angry with men; and what are the small and
the great things among men

  What is the cause of assenting to anything? The fact that it appears
to be true. It is not possible then to assent to that which appears
not to be true. Why? Because this is the nature of the
understanding, to incline to the true, to be dissatisfied with the
false, and in matters uncertain to withhold assent. What is the
proof of this? "Imagine, if you can, that it is now night." It is
not possible. "Take away your persuasion that it is day." It is not
possible. "Persuade yourself or take away your persuasion that the
stars are even in number." It is impossible. When, then, any man
assents to that which is false, be assured that he did not intend to
assent to it as false, for every soul is unwillingly deprived of the
truth, as Plato says; but the falsity seemed to him to be true.
Well, in acts what have we of the like kind as we have here truth or
falsehood? We have the fit and the not fit, the profitable and the
unprofitable, that which is suitable to a person and that which is
not, and whatever is like these. Can, then, a man think that a thing
is useful to him and not choose it? He cannot. How says Medea?

     "'Tis true I know what evil I shall do,

     But passion overpowers the better council.'"

She thought that to indulge her passion and take vengeance on her
husband was more profitable than to spare her children. "It was so;
but she was deceived." Show her plainly that she is deceived, and
she will not do it; but so long as you do not show it, what can she
follow except that which appears to herself? Nothing else. Why,
then, are you angry with the unhappy woman that she has been
bewildered about the most important things, and is become a viper
instead of a human creature? And why not, if it is possible, rather
pity, as we pity the blind and the lame, those who are blinded and
maimed in the faculties which are supreme?

  Whoever, then, clearly remembers this, that to man the measure of
every act is the appearance- whether the thing appears good or bad: if
good, he is free from blame; if bad, himself suffers the penalty,
for it is impossible that he who is deceived can be one person, and he
who suffers another person- whoever remembers this will not be angry
with any man, will not be vexed at any man, will not revile or blame
any man, nor hate nor quarrel with any man.

  "So then all these great and dreadful deeds have this origin, in the
appearance?" Yes, this origin and no other. The Iliad is nothing
else than appearance and the use of appearances. It appeared to
Paris to carry off the wife of Menelaus: it appeared to Helen to
follow him. If then it had appeared to Menelaus to feel that it was
a gain to be deprived of such a wife, what would have happened? Not
only a wi would the Iliad have been lost, but the Odyssey also. "On so
small a matter then did such great things depend?" But what do you
mean by such great things? Wars and civil commotions, and the
destruction of many men and cities. And what great matter is this? "Is
it nothing?" But what great matter is the death of many oxen, and many
sheep, and many nests of swallows or storks being burnt or
destroyed? "Are these things, then, like those?" Very like. Bodies
of men are destroyed, and the bodies of oxen and sheep; the
dwellings of men are burnt, and the nests of storks. What is there
in this great or dreadful? Or show me what is the difference between a
man's house and a stork's nest, as far as each is a dwelling; except
that man builds his little houses of beams and tiles and bricks, and
the stork builds them of sticks and mud. "Are a stork and a man, then,
like things?" What say you? In body they are very much alike.

  "Does a man then differ in no respect from a stork?" Don't suppose
that I say so; but there is no difference in these matters. "In
what, then, is the difference?" Seek and you will find that there is a
difference in another matter. See whether it is not in a man the
understanding of what he does, see if it is not in social community,
in fidelity, in modesty, in steadfastness, in intelligence. Where then
is the great good and evil in men? It is where the difference is. If
the difference is preserved and remains fenced round, and neither
modesty is destroyed, nor fidelity, nor intelligence, then the man
also is preserved; but if any of these things is destroyed and stormed
like a city, then the man too perishes; and in this consist the
great things. Paris, you say, sustained great damage, then, when the
Hellenes invaded and when they ravaged Troy, and when his brothers
perished. By no means; for no man is damaged by an action which is not
his own; but what happened at that time was only the destruction of
storks' nests: now the ruin of Paris was when he lost the character of
modesty, fidelity, regard to hospitality, and to decency. When was
Achilles ruined? Was it when Patroclus died? Not so. But it happened
when he began to be angry, when he wept for a girl, when he forgot
that he was at Troy not to get mistresses, but to fight. These
things are the ruin of men, this is being besieged, this is the
destruction of cities, when right opinions are destroyed, when they
are corrupted.

  "When, then, women are carried off, when children are made captives,
and when the men are killed, are these not evils?" How is it then that
you add to the facts these opinions? Explain this to me also. "I shall
not do that; but how is it that you say that these are not evils?" Let
us come to the rules: produce the precognitions: for it is because
this is neglected that we cannot sufficiently wonder at what men do.
When we intend to judge of weights, we do not judge by guess: where we
intend to judge of straight and crooked, we do not judge by guess.
In all cases where it is our interest to know what is true in any
matter, never will any man among us do anything by guess. But in
things which depend on the first and on the only cause of doing
right or wrong, of happiness or unhappiness, of being unfortunate or
fortunate, there only we are inconsiderate and rash. There is then
nothing like scales, nothing like a rule: but some appearance is
presented, and straightway I act according to it. Must I then
suppose that I am superior to Achilles or Agamemnon, so that they by
following appearances do and suffer so many evils: and shall not the
appearance be sufficient for me? And what tragedy has any other
beginning? The Atreus of Euripides, what is it? An appearance. The
OEdipus of Sophocles, what is it? An appearance. The Phoenix? An
appearance. The Hippolytus? An appearance. What kind of a man then
do you suppose him to be who pays no regard to this matter? And what
is the name of those who follow every appearance? "They are called
madmen." Do we then act at all differently?

  CHAPTER 29

  On constancy

  The being of the Good is a certain Will; the being of the Bad is a
certain kind of Will. What then are externals? Materials for the Will,
about which the will being conversant shall obtain its own good or
evil. How shall it obtain the good? If it does not admire the
materials; for the opinions about the materials, if the opinions are
right, make the will good: but perverse and distorted opinions make
the will bad. God has fixed this law, and says, "If you would have
anything good, receive it from yourself." You say, "No, but I have
it from another." Do not so: but receive it from yourself. Therefore
when the tyrant threatens and calls me, I say, "Whom do you threaten
If he says, "I will put you in chains," I say, "You threaten my
hands and my feet." If he says, "I will cut off your head," I reply,
"You threaten my head." If he says, "I will throw you into prison,"
I say, "You threaten the whole of this poor body." If he threatens
me with banishment, I say the same. "Does he, then, not threaten you
at all?" If I feel that all these things do not concern me, he does
not threaten me at all; but if I fear any of them, it is I whom he
threatens. Whom then do I fear? the master of what? The master of
things which are in my own power? There is no such master. Do I fear
the master of things which are not in my power? And what are these
things to me?

  "Do you philosophers then teach us to despise kings?" I hope not.
Who among us teaches to claim against them the power over things which
they possess? Take my poor body, take my property, take my reputation,
take those who are about me. If I advise any persons to claim these
things, they may truly accuse me. "Yes, but I intend to command your
opinions also." And who has given you this power? How can you
conquer the opinion of another man? "By applying terror to it," he
replies, "I will conquer it." Do you not know that opinion conquers
itself, and is not conquered by another? But nothing else can
conquer Will except the Will itself. For this reason, too, the law
of God is most powerful and most just, which is this: "Let the
stronger always be superior to the weaker." "Ten are stronger than
one." For what? For putting in chains, for killing, for dragging
whither they choose, for taking away what a man has. The ten therefore
conquer the one in this in which they are stronger. "In what then
are the ten weaker," If the one possess right opinions and the
others do not. "Well then, can the ten conquer in this matter?" How is
it possible? If we were placed in the scales, must not the heavier
draw down the scale in which it is?

  "How strange, then, that Socrates should have been so treated by the
Athenians." Slave, why do you say Socrates? Speak of the thing as it
is: how strange that the poor body of Socrates should have been
carried off and dragged to prison by stronger men, and that any one
should have given hemlock to the poor body of Socrates, and that it
should breathe out the life. Do these things seem strange. do they
seem unjust, do you on account of these things blame God? Had Socrates
then no equivalent for these things, Where, then, for him was the
nature of good? Whom shall we listen to, you or him? And what does
Socrates say? "Anytus and Meletus can kill me, but they cannot hurt
me": and further, he says, "If it so pleases God, so let it be."

  But show me that he who has the inferior principles overpowers him
who is superior in principles. You will never show this, nor come near
showing it; for this is the law of nature and of God that the superior
shall always overpower the inferior. In what? In that in which it is
superior. One body is stronger than another: many are stronger than
one: the thief is stronger than he who is not a thief. This is the
reason why I also lost my lamp, because in wakefulness the thief was
superior to me. But the man bought the lamp at this price: for a
lamp he became a thief, a faithless fellow, and like a wild beast.
This seemed to him a good bargain. Be it so. But a man has seized me
by the cloak, and is drawing me to the public place: then others
bawl out, "Philosopher, what has been the use of your opinions? see
you are dragged to prison, you are going to be beheaded." And what
system of philosophy could f have made so that, if a stronger man
should have laid hold of my cloak, I should not be dragged off; that
if ten men should have laid hold of me and cast me into prison, I
should not be cast in? Have I learned nothing else then? I have
learned to see that everything which happens, if it be independent
of my will, is nothing to me. I may ask if you have not gained by
this. Why then do you seek advantage in anything else than in that
in which you have learned that advantage is?

  Then sitting in prison I say: "The man who cries out in this way
neither hears what words mean, nor understands what is said, nor
does he care at all to know what philosophers say or what they do. Let
him alone."

  But now he says to the prisoner, "Come out from your prison." If you
have no further need of me in prison, I come out: if you should have
need of me again, I will enter the prison. "How long will you act
thus?" So long as reason requires me to be with the body: but when
reason does not require this, take away the body, and fare you well.
Only we must not do it inconsiderately, nor weakly, nor for any slight
reason; for, on the other hand, God does not wish it to be done, and
he has need of such a world and such inhabitants in it. But if he
sounds the signal for retreat, as he did to Socrates, we must obey him
who gives the signal, as if he were a general.

  "Well, then, ought we to say such things to the many?" Why should
we? Is it not enough for a man to be persuaded himself? When
children come clapping their hands and crying out, "To-day is the good
Saturnalia," do we say, "The Saturnalia are not good?" By no means,
but we clap our hands also. Do you also then, when you are not able to
make a man change his mind, be assured that he is a child, and clap
your hands with him, and if you do not choose to do this, keep silent.

  A man must keep this in mind; and when he is called to any such
difficulty, he should know that the time is come for showing if he has
been instructed. For he who is come into a difficulty is like a
young man from a school who has practiced the resolution of
syllogisms; and if any person proposes to him an easy syllogism, he
says, "Rather propose to me a syllogism which is skillfully
complicated that I may exercise myself on it." Even athletes are
dissatisfied with slight young men, and say "He cannot lift me." "This
is a youth of noble disposition." But when the time of trial is
come, one of you must weep and say, "I wish that I had learned
more." A little more of what? If you did not learn these things in
order to show them in practice, why did you learn them? I think that
there is some one among you who are sitting here, who is suffering
like a woman in labour, and saying, "Oh, that such a difficulty does
not present itself to me as that which has come to this man; oh,
that I should be wasting my life in a corner, when I might be
crowned at Olympia. When will any one announce to me such a
contest?" Such ought to be the disposition of all of you. Even among
the gladiators of Caesar there are some who complain grievously that
they are not brought forward and matched, and they offer up prayers to
God and address themselves to their superintendents entreating that
they might fight. And will no one among you show himself such? I would
willingly take a voyage for this purpose and see what my athlete is
doing, how he is studying his subject. "I do not choose such a
subject," he says. Why, is it in your power to take what subject you
choose? There has been given to you such a body as you have, such
parents, such brethren, such a country, such a place in your
country: then you come to me and say, "Change my subject." Have you
not abilities which enable you to manage the subject which has been
given to you? "It is your business to propose; it is mine to
exercise myself well." However, you do not say so, but you say, "Do
not propose to me such a tropic, but such: do not urge against me such
an objection, but such." There will be a time, perhaps, when tragic
actors will suppose that they are masks and buskins and the long
cloak. I say, these things, man, are your material and subject.
Utter something that we may know whether you are a tragic actor or a
buffoon; for both of you have all the rest in common. If any one
then should take away the tragic actor's buskins and his mask, and
introduce him on the stage as a phantom, is the tragic actor lost,
or does he still remain? If he has voice, he still remains.

  An example of another kind. "Assume the governorship of a province."
I assume it, and when I have assumed it, I show how an instructed
man behaves. "Lay aside the laticlave and, clothing yourself in
rags, come forward in this character." What then have I not the
power of displaying a good voice? How, then, do you now appear? As a
witness summoned by God. "Come forward, you, and bear testimony for
me, for you are worthy to be brought forward as a witness by me: is
anything external to the will good or bad? do I hurt any man? have I
made every man's interest dependent on any man except himself?" What
testimony do you give for God? "I am in a wretched condition,
Master, and I am unfortunate; no man cares for me, no man gives me
anything; all blame me, all speak ill of me." Is this the evidence
that you are going to give, and disgrace his summons, who has
conferred so much honour on you, and thought you worthy of being
called to bear such testimony?

  But suppose that he who has the power has declared, "I judge you
to be impious and profane." What has happened to you? "I have been
judged to be impious and profane?" Nothing else? "Nothing else." But
if the same person had passed judgment on an hypothetical syllogism,
and had made a declaration, "the conclusion that, if it is day, it
is light, I declare to be false," what has happened to the
hypothetical syllogism? who is judged in this case? who has been
condemned? the hypothetical syllogism, or the man who has been
deceived by it? Does he, then, who has the power of making any
declaration about you know what is pious or impious? Has he studied
it, and has he learned it? Where? From whom? Then is it the fact
that a musician pays no regard to him who declares that the lowest
chord in the lyre is the highest; nor yet a geometrician, if he
declares that the lines from the centre of a circle to the
circumference are not equal; and shall he who is really instructed pay
any regard to the uninstructed man when he pronounces judgment on what
is pious and what is impious, on what is just and unjust? Oh, the
signal wrong done by the instructed. Did they learn this here?

  Will you not leave the small arguments about these matters to
others, to lazy fellows, that they may sit in a corner and receive
their sorry pay, or grumble that no one gives them anything; and
will you not come forward and make use of what you have learned? For
it is not these small arguments that are wanted now: the writings of
the Stoics are full of them. What then is the thing which is wanted? A
man who shall apply them, one who by his acts shall bear testimony
to his words. Assume, I, entreat you, this character, that we may no
longer use in the schools the examples of the ancients but may have
some example of our own.

  To whom then does the contemplation of these matters belong? To
him who has leisure, for man is an animal that loves contemplation.
But it is shameful to contemplate these things as runaway slaves do;
we should sit, as in a theatre, free from distraction, and listen at
one time to the tragic actor, at another time to the lute-player;
and not do as slaves do. As soon as the slave has taken his station he
praises the actor and at the same time looks round: then if any one
calls out his master's name, the slave is immediately frightened and
disturbed. It is shameful for philosophers thus to contemplate the
works of nature. For what is a master? Man is not the master of man;
but death is, and life and pleasure and pain; for if he comes
without these things, bring Caesar to me and you will see how firm I
am. But when he shall come with these things, thundering and
lightning, and when I am afraid of them, what do I do then except to
recognize my master like the runaway slave? But so long as I have
any respite from these terrors, as a runaway slave stands in the
theatre, so do I: I bathe, I drink, I sing; but all this I do with
terror and uneasiness. But if I shall release myself from my
masters, that is from those things by means of which masters are
formidable, what further trouble have I, what master have I still?

  "What then, ought we to publish these things to all men?" No, but we
ought to accommodate ourselves to the ignorant and to say: "This man
recommends to me that which he thinks good for himself: I excuse him."
For Socrates also excused the gaoler, who had the charge of him in
prison and was weeping when Socrates was going to drink the poison,
and said, "How generously he laments over us." Does he then say to the
gaoler that for this reason we have sent away the women? No, but he
says it to his friends who were able to hear it; and he treats the
gaoler as a child.

  CHAPTER 30

  What we ought to have ready in difficult circumstances

  When you are going into any great personage, remember that Another
also from above sees what is going on, and that you ought to please
Him rather than the other. He, then, who sees from above asks you: "In
the schools what used you to say about exile and bonds and death and
disgrace?" I used to say that they are things indifferent. "What
then do you say of them now? Are they changed at all?" No. "Are you
changed then?" No. "Tell me then what things are indifferent?" The
things which are independent of the will. "Tell me, also, what follows
from this." The things which are independent of the will are nothing
to me. "Tell me also about the Good, what was your opinion?" A will
such as we ought to have and also such a use of appearances. "And
the end, what is it?" To follow Thee. "Do you say this now also?" I
say the same now also.

  Then go into the great personage boldly and remember these things;
and you will see what a youth is who has studied these things when
he is among men who have not studied them. I indeed imagine that you
will have such thoughts as these: "Why do we make so great and so many
preparations for nothing? Is this the thing which men name power? Is
this the antechamber? this the men of the bedchamber? this the armed
guards? Is it for this that I listened to so many discourses? All this
is nothing: but I have been preparing myself for something great."
DISCOURSES

                                    BOOK TWO

  CHAPTER 1

  That confidence is not inconsistent with caution

  The opinion of the philosophers, perhaps, seems to some to be a
paradox; but still let us examine as well as we can, if it is true
that it is possible to do everything both with caution and with
confidence. For caution seems to be in a manner contrary to
confidence, and contraries are in no way consistent. That which
seems to many to be a paradox in the matter under consideration in
my opinion is of this kind: if we asserted that we ought to employ
caution and in the same things, men might justly accuse us of bringing
together things which cannot be united. But now where is the
difficulty in what is said? for if these things are true, which have
been often said and often proved, that the nature of good is in the
use of appearances, and the nature of evil likewise, and that things
independent of our will do not admit either the nature of evil nor
of good, what paradox do the philosophers assert if they say that
where things are not dependent on the will, there you should employ
confidence, but where they are dependent on the will, there you should
employ caution? For if the bad consists in a bad exercise of the will,
caution ought only to be used where things are dependent on the
will. But if things independent of the will and not in our power are
nothing to us, with respect to these we must employ confidence; and
thus we shall both be cautious and confident, and indeed confident
because of our caution. For by employing caution toward things which
are really bad, it will result that we shall have confidence with
respect to things which are not so.

  We are then in the condition of deer; when they flee from the
huntsmen's feathers in fright, whither do they turn and in what do
they seek refuge as safe? They turn to the nets, and thus they
perish by confounding things which are objects of fear with things
that they ought not to fear. Thus we also act: in what cases do we
fear? In things which are independent of the will. In what cases, on
the contrary, do we behave with confidence, as if there were no
danger? In things dependent on the will. To be deceived then, or to
act rashly, or shamelessly or with base desire to seek something, does
not concern us at all, if we only hit the mark in things which are
independent of our will. But where there is death, or exile or pain or
infamy, there we attempt or examine to run away, there we are struck
with terror. Therefore, as we may expect it to happen with those who
err in the greatest matters, we convert natural confidence into
audacity, desperation, rashness, shamelessness; and we convert natural
caution and modesty into cowardice and meanness, which are full of
fear and confusion. For if a man should transfer caution to those
things in which the will may be exercised and the acts of the will, he
will immediately, by willing to be cautious, have also the power of
avoiding what he chooses: but if he transfer it to the things which
are not in his power and will, and attempt to avoid the things which
are in the power of others, he will of necessity fear, he will be
unstable, he will be disturbed. For death or pain is not formidable,
but the fear of pain or death. For this reason we commend the poet who
said

     Not death is evil, but a shameful death.

Confidence then ought to be employed against death, and caution
against the fear of death. But now we do the contrary, and employ
against death the attempt to escape; and to our opinion about it we
employ carelessness, rashness and indifference. These things
Socrates properly used to call "tragic masks"; for as to children
masks appear terrible and fearful from inexperience, we also are
affected in like manner by events for no other reason than children
are by masks. For what is a child? Ignorance. What is a child? Want of
knowledge. For when a child knows these things, he is in no way
inferior to us. What is death? A "tragic mask." Turn it and examine
it. See, it does not bite. The poor body must be separated from the
spirit either now or later, as it was separated from it before. Why,
then, are you troubled, if it be separated now? for if it is not
separated now, it will be separated afterward. Why? That the period of
the universe may be completed, for it has need of the present, and
of the future, and of the past. What is pain? A mask. Turn it and
examine it. The poor flesh is moved roughly, then, on the contrary,
smoothly. If this does not satisfy you, the door is open: if it
does, bear. For the door ought to be open for all occasions; and so we
have no trouble.

  What then is the fruit of these opinions? It is that which ought
to he the most noble and the most becoming to those who are really
educated, release from perturbation, release from fear, freedom. For
in these matters we must not believe the many, who say that free
persons only ought to be educated, but we should rather believe the
philosophers, who say that the educated only are free. "How is
this?" In this manner. Is freedom anything else than the power of
living as we choose? "Nothing else." Tell me then, ye men, do you wish
to live in error? "We do not." No one then who lives in error is free.
Do you wish to live in fear? Do you wish to live in sorrow? Do you
wish to live in perturbation? "By no means." No one, then, who is in a
state of fear or sorrow or perturbation is free; but whoever is
delivered from sorrows and fears and perturbations, he is at the
same time also delivered from servitude. How then can we continue to
believe you, most dear legislators, when you say, "We only allow
free persons to be educated?" For philosophers say we allow none to be
free except the educated; that is, God does not allow it. "When then a
man has turned round before the praetor his own slave, has he done
nothing?" He has done something. "What?" He has turned round his own
slave before the praetor. "Has he done nothing, more?" Yes: he is also
bound to pay for him the tax called the twentieth. "Well then, is
not the man who has gone through this ceremony become free?" No more
than he is become free from perturbations. Have you who are able to
turn round others no master? is not money your master, or a girl or
a boy, or some tyrant, or some friend of the tyrant? why do you
tremble then when you are going off to any trial of this kind? It is
for this reason that I often say: Study and hold in readiness these
principles by which you may determine what those things are with
reference to which you ought to have confidence, and those things with
reference to which you ought to be cautious: courageous in that
which does not depend on your will; cautious in that which does depend
on it.

  "Well have I not read to you, and do you not know what I was doing?"
In what? "In my little dissertations." Show me how you are with
respect to desire and aversion; and show if you do not fail in getting
what you wish, me and if you do not fall into the things which you
would avoid: but as to these long and laboured sentences, you will
take them and blot them out.

  "What then did not Socrates write?" And who wrote so much? But
how? As he could not always have at hand one to argue against his
principles or to be argued against in turn, he used to argue with
and examine himself, and he was always treating at least some one
subject in a practical way. These are the things which a philosopher
writes. But little dissertations and that method, which I speak of, he
leaves to others, to the stupid, or to those happy men who being
free from perturbations have leisure, or to such as are too foolish to
reckon consequences.

  And will you now, when the opportunity invites, go and display those
things which you possess, and recite them, and make an idle show,
and say, "See how I make dialogues?" Do not so, my man: but rather
say: "See how I am not disappointed of that which I desire. See how
I do not fall into that which I would avoid. Set death before me,
and you will see. Set before me pain, prison, disgrace and
condemnation." This is the proper display of a young man who is come
out of the schools. But leave the rest to others, and let no one
ever hear you say a word about these things; and if any man commends
you for them, do not allow it; but think that you are nobody and
know nothing. Only show that you know this, how never to be
disappointed in your desire and how never to fall into that which
you would avoid. Let others labour at forensic causes, problems and
syllogisms: do you labour at thinking about death, chains, the rack,
exile; and do all this with confidence and reliance on him who has
called you to these sufferings, who has judged you worthy of the place
in which, being stationed, you will show what things the rational
governing power can do when it takes its stand against the forces
which are not within the power of our will. And thus this paradox will
no longer appear either impossible or a paradox, that a man ought to
be at the same time cautious and courageous: courageous toward the
things which do not depend on the will, and cautious in things which
are within the power of the will.

  CHAPTER 2

  Of Tranquillity

  Consider, you who are going into court, what you wish to maintain
and what you wish to succeed in. For if you wish to maintain a will
conformable to nature, you have every security, every facility, you
have no troubles. For if you wish to maintain what is in your own
power and is naturally free, and if you are content with these, what
else do you care for? For who is the master of such things? Who can
take them away? If you choose to be modest and faithful, who shall not
allow you to be so? If you choose not to be restrained or compelled,
who shall compel you to desire what you think that you ought not to
desire? who shall compel you to avoid what you do not think fit to
avoid? But what do you say? The judge will determine against you
something that appears formidable; but that you should also suffer
in trying to avoid it, how can he do that? When then the pursuit of
objects and the avoiding of them are in your power, what else do you
care for? Let this be your preface, this your narrative, this your
confirmation, this your victory, this your peroration, this your
applause.

  Therefore Socrates said to one who was reminding him to prepare
for his trial, "Do you not think then that I have been preparing for
it all my life?" By what kind of preparation? "I have maintained
that which was in my own power." How then? "I have never done anything
unjust either in my private or in my public life."

  But if you wish to maintain externals also, your poor body, your
little property and your little estimation, I advise you to make
from this moment all possible preparation, and then consider both
the nature of your judge and your adversary. If it is necessary to
embrace his knees, embrace his knees; if to weep, weep; if to groan,
groan. For when you have subjected to externals what is your own, then
be a slave and do not resist, and do not sometimes choose to be a
slave, and sometimes not choose, but with all your mind be one or
the other, either free or a slave, either instructed or
uninstructed, either a well-bred cock or a mean one, either endure
to be beaten until you die or yield at once; and let it not happen
to you to receive many stripes and then to yield. But if these
things are base, determine immediately: "Where is the nature of evil
and good? It is where truth is: where truth is and where nature is,
there is caution: where truth is, there is courage where nature is."

  For what do you think? do you think that, if Socrates had wished
to preserve externals, he would have come forward and said: "Anytus
and Meletus can certainly kill me, but to harm me they are not
able?" Was he so foolish as not to see that this way leads not to
the preservation of life and fortune, but to another end? What is
the reason then that he takes no account of his adversaries, and
even irritates them? Just in the same way my friend Heraclitus, who
had a little suit in Rhodes about a bit of land, and had proved to the
judges that his case was just, said, when he had come to the
peroration of his speech, "I will neither entreat you nor do I care
what wi judgment you will give, and it is you rather than I who are on
your trial." And thus he ended the business. What need was there of
this? Only do not entreat; but do not also say, "I. do not entreat";
unless there is a fit occasion to irritate purposely the judges, as
was the case with Socrates. And you, if you are preparing such a
peroration, why do you wait, why do you obey the order to submit to
trial? For if you wish to be crucified, wait and the cross will
come: but if you choose to submit and to plead your cause as well as
you can, you must do what is consistent with this object, provided you
maintain what is your own.

  For this reason also it is ridiculous to say, "Suggest something
to me." What should I suggest to you? "Well, form my mind so as to
accommodate itself to any event." Why that is just the same as if a
man who is ignorant of letters should say, "Tell me what to write when
any name is proposed to me." For if I should tell him to write Dion,
and then another should come and propose to him not the name of Dion
but that of Theon, what will be done? what will he write? But if you
behave practiced writing, you are also prepared to write anything that
is required. If you are not, what. can I now suggest? For if
circumstances require something else, what will you say or what will
you do? Remember, then, this general precept and you will need no
suggestion. But if you gape after externals, you must of necessity
ramble up and down in obedience to the will of your master. And who is
the master? He who has the power over the things which you seek to
gain or try to avoid.

  CHAPTER 3

  To those who recommend persons to philosophers

  Diogenes said well to one who asked from him letters of
recommendation, "That you are a man he said, "he will know as soon
as he sees you; and he will know whether you are good or bad, if he is
by experience skillful to distinguish the good and the bad; but if
he is without experience, he will never know, if I write to him ten
thousand times." For it is just the same as if a drachma asked to be
recommended to a person to be tested. If he is skillful in testing
silver, he will know what you are, for you will recommend yourself. We
ought then in life also to have some skill as in the case of silver
coin that a man may be able to say, like the judge of silver, "Bring
me any drachma and I will test it." But in the case of syllogisms I
would say, "Bring any man that you please, and I will distinguish
for you the man who knows how to resolve syllogisms and the man who
does not." Why? Because I know how to resolve syllogisms. I have the
power, which a man must have who is able to discover those who have
the power of resolving syllogisms. But in life how do I act? At one
time I call a thing good, and at another time bad. What is the reason?
The contrary to that which is in the case of syllogisms, ignorance and
inexperience.

  CHAPTER 4

  Against a person who had once been detected in adultery

  As Epictetus was saying that man is formed for fidelity, and that he
who subverts fidelity subverts the peculiar characteristic of men,
there entered one of those who are considered to be men of letters,
who had once been detected in adultery in the city. Then Epictetus
continued: But if we lay aside this fidelity for which we are formed
and make designs against our neighbor's wife, what are we are we
doing? What else but destroying and overthrowing? Whom? The man of
fidelity, the man of modesty, the man of sanctity. Is this all? And
are we not overthrowing neighbourhood, and friendship, and the
community; and in what place are we putting ourselves? How shall I
consider you, man? As a neighbour, as a friend? What kind of one? As a
citizen? Wherein shall I trust you? So if you were an utensil so
worthless that a man could not use you, you would be pitched out on
the dung heaps, and no man would pick you up. But if, being a man, you
are unable to fill any place which befits a man, what shall we do with
you? For suppose that you cannot hold the place of a friend, can you
hold the place of a slave? And who will trust you? Are you not then
content that you also should be pitched somewhere on a dung heap, as a
useless utensil, and a bit of dung? Then will you say, "No man,
cares for me, a man of letters"? They do not, because you are bad
and useless. It is just as if the wasps complained because no man
cares for them, but all fly from them, and if a man can, he strikes
them and knocks them down. You have such a sting that you throw into
trouble and pain any man that you wound with it. What would you have
us do with you? You have no place where you can be put.

  "What then, are not women common by nature?" So I say also; for a
little pig is common to all the invited guests, but when the
portions have been distributed, go, if you think it right, and
snatch up the portion of him who reclines next to you, or slyly
steal it, or place your hand down by it and lay hold of it, and if you
cannot tear away a bit of the meat, grease your fingers and lick them.
A fine companion over cups, and Socratic guest indeed! "Well, is not
the theatre common to the citizens?" When then they have taken their
seats, come, if you think proper, and eject one of them. In this way
women also are common by nature. When, then, the legislator, like
the master of a feast, has distributed them, will you not also look
for your own portion and not filch and handle what belongs to another.
"But I am a man of letters and understand Archedemus." Understand
Archedemus then, and be an adulterer, and faithless, and instead of
a man, be a wolf or an ape: for what is the difference?

  CHAPTER 5

  How magnanimity is consistent with care

  Things themselves are indifferent; but the use of them is not
indifferent. How then shall a man preserve firmness and
tranquillity, and at the same time be careful and neither rash nor
negligent? If he imitates those who play at dice. The counters are
indifferent; the dice are indifferent. How do I know what the cast
will be? But to use carefully and dexterously the cast of the dice,
this is my business. Thus in life also the chief business is this:
distinguish and separate things, and say, "Externals are not in my
power: will is in my power. Where shall I seek the good and the bad?
Within, in the things which are my own." But in what does not belong
to you call nothing either good or bad, or profit or damage or
anything of the kind.

  "What then? Should we use such things carelessly?" In no way: for
this on the other hand is bad for the faculty of the will, and
consequently against nature; but we should act carefully because the
use is not indifferent and we should also act with firmness and
freedom from perturbations because the material is indifferent. For
where the material is not indifferent, there no man can hinder me
nor compel me. Where I can be hindered and compelled the obtaining
of those things is not in my power, nor is it good or bad; but the use
is either bad or good, and the use is in my power. But it is difficult
to mingle and to bring together these two things, the carefulness of
him who is affected by the matter and the firmness of him who has no
regard for it; but it is not impossible; and if it is, happiness is
impossible. But we should act as we do in the case of a voyage. What
can I do? I can choose the master of the ship, the sailors, the day,
the opportunity. Then comes a storm. What more have I to care for? for
my part is done. The business belongs to another- the master. But
the ship is sinking- what then have I to do? I do the only things that
I can, not to be drowned full of fear, nor screaming, nor blaming God,
but knowing that what has been produced must also perish: for I am not
an immortal being, but a man, a part of the whole, as an hour is a
part of the day: I must be present like the hour, and past like the
hour. What difference, then, does it make to me how I pass away,
whether by being suffocated or by a fever, for I must pass through
some such means?

  This is just what you will see those doing who play at ball
skillfully. No one cares about the ball being good or bad, but about
throwing and catching it. In this therefore is the skill, this the
art, the quickness, the judgement, so that if I spread out my lap I
may not be able to catch it, and another, if I throw, may catch the
ball. But if with perturbation and fear we receive or throw the
ball, what kind of play is it then, and wherein shall a man be steady,
and how shall a man see the order in the game? But one will say,
"Throw"; or, "Do not throw"; and another will say, "You have thrown
once." This is quarreling, not play.

  Socrates, then, knew how to play at ball. How?" By using
pleasantry in the court where he was tried. "Tell me," he says,
"Anytus, how do you say that I do not believe in God. The Demons,
who are they, think you? Are they not sons of Gods, or compounded of
gods and men?" When Anytus admitted this, Socrates said, "Who then,
think you, can believe that there are mules, but not asses"; and
this he said as if he were playing at ball. And what was the ball in
that case? Life, chains, banishment, a draught of poison, separation
from wife and leaving children orphans. These were the things with
which he was playing; but still he did play and threw the ball
skillfully. So we should do: we must employ all the care of the
players, but show the same indifference about the ball. For we ought
by all means to apply our art to some external material, not as
valuing the material, but, whatever it may be, showing our art in
it. Thus too the weaver does not make wool, but exercises his art upon
such as he receives. Another gives you food and property and is able
to take them away and your poor body also. When then you have received
the material, work on it. If then you come out without having suffered
anything, all who meet you will congratulate you on your escape; but
he who knows how to look at such things, if he shall see that you have
behaved properly in the matter, will commend you and be pleased with
you; and if he shall find that you owe your escape to any want of
proper behavior, he will do the contrary. For where rejoicing is
reasonable, there also is congratulation reasonable.

  How then is it said that some external things are according to
nature and others contrary to nature? It is said as it might be said
if we were separated from union: for to the foot I shall say that it
is according to nature for it to be clean; but if you take it as a
foot and as a thing not detached, it will befit it both to step into
the mud and tread on thorns, and sometimes to be cut off for the
benefit of the whole body; otherwise it is no longer a foot. We should
think in some way about ourselves also. What are you? A man. If you
consider yourself as detached from other men, it is according to
nature to live to old age, to be rich, to be healthy. But if you
consider yourself as a man and a part of a certain whole, it is for
the sake of that whole that at one time you should be sick, at another
time take a voyage and run into danger, and at another time be in
want, and, in some cases, die prematurely. Why then are you
troubled? Do you not know, that as a foot is no longer a foot if it is
detached from the body, so you are no longer a man if you are
separated from other men. For what is a man? A part of a state, of
that first which consists of Gods and of men; then of that which is
called next to it, which is a small image of the universal state.
"What then must I be brought to trial; must another have a fever,
another sail on the sea, another die, and another be condemned?"
Yes, for it is impossible in such a body, in such a universe of
things, among so many living together, that such things should not
happen, some to one and others to others. It is your duty then,
since you are come here, to say what you ought, to arrange these
things as it is fit. Then some one says, "I shall charge you with
doing me wrong." Much good may it do you: I have done my part; but
whether you also have done yours, you must look to that; for there
is some danger of this too, that it may escape your notice.

  CHAPTER 6

  Of indifference

  The hypothetical proposition is indifferent: the judgment about it
is not indifferent, but it is either knowledge or opinion or error.
Thus life is indifferent: the use is not indifferent. When any man
then tells you that these things also are indifferent, do not become
negligent; and when a man invites you to be careful, do not become
abject and struck with admiration of material things. And it is good
for you to know your own preparation and power, that in those
matters where you have not been prepared, you may keep quiet, and
not be vexed, if others have the advantage over you. For you, too,
in syllogisms will claim to have the advantage over them; and if
others should be vexed at this, you will console them by saying, "I
have learned them, and you have not." Thus also where there is need of
any practice, seek not that which is required from the need, but yield
in that matter to those who have had practice, and be yourself content
with firmness of mind.

  Go and salute a certain person. "How?" Not meanly. "But I have
been shut out, for I have not learned to make my way through the
window; and when I have found the door shut, I must either come back
or enter through the window." But still speak to him. "In what way?"
Not meanly. But suppose that you have not got what you wanted. Was
this your business, and not his? Why then do you claim that which
belongs to another? Always remember what is your own, and what belongs
to another; and you will not be disturbed. Chrysippus therefore said
well, "So long as future things are uncertain, I always cling to those
which are more adapted to the conservation of that which is
according to nature; for God himself has given me the faculty of
such choice." But if I knew that it was fated for me to be sick, I
would even move toward it; for the foot also, if it had
intelligence, would move to go into the mud. For why are ears of
corn produced? Is it not that they may become dry? And do they not
become dry that they may be reaped? for they are not separated from
communion with other things. If then they had perception, ought they
to wish never to be reaped? But this is a curse upon ears of corn,
never to be reaped. So we must know that in the case of men too it
is a curse not to die, just the same as not to be ripened and not to
be reaped. But since we must be reaped, and we also know that we are
reaped, we are vexed at it; for we neither know what we are nor have
we studied what belongs to man, as those who have studied horses
know what belongs to horses. But Chrysantas, when he was going to
strike the enemy, checked himself when he heard the trumpet sounding a
retreat: so it seemed better to him to obey the general's command than
to follow his own inclination. But not one of us chooses, even when
necessity summons, readily to obey it, but weeping and groaning we
suffer what we do suffer, and we call them "circumstances." What
kind of circumstances, man? If you give the name of circumstances to
the things which are around you, all things are circumstances; but
if you call hardships by this name, what hardship is there in the
dying of that which has been produced? But that which destroys is
either a sword, or a wheel, or the sea, or a tile, or a tyrant. Why do
you care about the way of going down to Hades? All ways are equal. But
if you will listen to the truth, the way which the tyrant sends you is
shorter. A tyrant never killed a man in six months: but a fever is
often a year about it. All these things are only sound and the noise
of empty names.

  "I am in danger of my life from Caesar." And am not I in danger
who dwell in Nicopolis, where there are so many earthquakes: and
when you are crossing the Hadriatic, what hazard do you run? Is it not
the hazard of your life? "But I am in danger also as to opinion." Do
you mean your own? how? For who can compel you to have any opinion
which you do not choose? But is it as to another man's opinion? and
what kind of danger is yours, if others have false opinions? "But I am
in danger of being banished." What is it to be banished? To be
somewhere else than at Rome? "Yes: what then if I should be sent to
Gyara?" If that suits you, you will go there; but if it does not,
you can go to another place instead of Gyara, whither he also will go,
who sends you to Gyara, whether he choose or not. Why then do you go
up to Rome as if it were something great? It is not worth all this
preparation, that an ingenuous youth should say, "It was not worth
while to have heard so much and to have written so much and to have
sat so long by the side of an old man who is not worth much." Only
remember that division by which your own and not your own are
distinguished: never claim anything which belongs to others. A
tribunal and a prison are each a place, one high and the other low;
but the will can be maintained equal, if you choose to maintain it
equal in each. And we shall then be imitators of Socrates, when we are
able to write paeans in prison. But in our present disposition,
consider if we could endure in prison another person saying to us.
"Would you like me to read Paeans to you?" "Why do you trouble me?
do you not know the evils which hold me? Can I in such circumstances?"
What circumstances? "I am going to die." And will other men be
immortal?

  CHAPTER 7

  How we ought to use divination

  Through an unreasonable regard to divination many of us omit many
duties. For what more can the diviner see than death or danger or
disease, generally things of that kind? If then I must expose myself
to danger for a friend, and if it is my duty even to die for him, what
need have I then for divination? Have I not within me a diviner who
has told me the nature of good and of evil, and has explained to me
the signs of both? What need have I then to consult the viscera of
victims or the flight of birds, and why do I submit when he says,
"It is for your interest"? For does he know what is for my interest,
does he know what is good; and as he has learned the signs of the
viscera, has he also learned the signs of good and evil? For if he
knows the signs of these, he knows the signs both of the beautiful and
of the ugly, and of the just and of the unjust. Do you tell me, man,
what is the thing which is signified for me: is it life or death,
poverty or wealth? But whether these things are for my interest or
whether they are not, I do not intend to ask you. Why don't you give
your opinion on matters of grammar, and why do you give it here
about things on which we are all in error and disputing with one
another? The woman, therefore, who intended to send by a vessel a
month's provisions to Gratilla in her banishment, made a good answer
to him who said that Domitian would seize what she sent. "I would
rather," she replied, "that Domitian should seize all than that I
should not send it."

  What then leads us to frequent use of divination? Cowardice, the
dread of what will happen. This is the reason why we flatter the
diviners. "Pray, master, shall I succeed to the property of my
father?" "Let us see: let us sacrifice on the occasion." "Yes, master,
as fortune chooses." When he has said, "You shall succeed to the
inheritance," we thank him as if we received the inheritance from him.
The consequence is that they play upon us.

  What then should we do? We ought to come without desire or aversion,
as the wayfarer asks of the man whom he meets which of two roads leads
(to his journey's end), without any desire for that which leads to the
right rather than to the left, for he has no wish to go by any road
except the road which leads (to his end). In the same way ought we
to come to God also as a guide; as we use our eyes, not asking them to
show us rather such things as we wish, but receiving the appearances
of things such as the eyes present them to us. But now we trembling
take the augur by the hand, and, while we invoke God, we entreat the
augur, and say, "Master have mercy on me; suffer me to come safe out
of this difficulty." Wretch would you have, then, anything other
than what is best? Is there then anything better than what pleases
God? Why do you, so far as in your power, corrupt your judge and
lead astray your adviser?

  CHAPTER 8

  What is the nature of the good

  God is beneficial. But the Good also is beneficial. It is consistent
then that where the nature of God is, there also the nature of the
good should be. What then is the nature of God? Flesh? Certainly
not. An estate in land? By no means. Fame? No. Is it intelligence,
knowledge, right reason? Yes. Herein then simply seek the nature of
the good; for I suppose that you do not seek it in a plant. No. Do you
seek it in an irrational animal? No. If then you seek it in a rational
animal, why do you still seek it anywhere except in the superiority of
rational over irrational animals? Now plants have not even the power
of using appearances, and for this reason you do not apply the term
good to them. The good then requires the use of appearances. Does it
require this use only? For if you say that it requires this use
only, say that the good, and that happiness and unhappiness are in
irrational animals also. But you do not say this, and you do right;
for if they possess even in the highest degree the use of appearances,
yet they have not the faculty of understanding the use of appearances;
and there is good reason for this, for they exist for the purpose of
serving others, and they exercise no superiority. For the ass, I
suppose, does not exist for any superiority over others. No; but
because we had need of a back which is able to bear something; and
in truth we had need also of his being able to walk, and for this
reason he received also the faculty of making use of appearances,
for otherwise he would not have been able to walk. And here then
the matter stopped. For if he had also received the faculty of
comprehending the use of appearances, it is plain that consistently
with reason he would not then have been subjected to us, nor would
he have done us these services, but he would have been equal to us and
like to us.

  Will you not then seek the nature of good in the rational animal?
for if it is not there, you not choose to say that it exists in any
other thing. "What then? are not plants and animals also the works
of God?" They are; but they are not superior things, nor yet parts
of the Gods. But you are a superior thing; you are a portion separated
from the deity; you have in yourself a certain portion of him. Why
then are you ignorant of your own noble descent? Why do you not know
whence you came? will you not remember when you are eating, who you
are who eat and whom you feed? When you are in conjunction with a
woman, will you not remember who you are who do this thing? When you
are in social intercourse, when you are exercising yourself, when
you are engaged in discussion, know you not that you are nourishing
a god, that you are exercising a god? Wretch, you are carrying about a
god with you, and you know it not. Do you think that I mean some God
of silver or of gold, and external? You carry him within yourself, and
you perceive not that you are polluting him by impure thoughts and
dirty deeds. And if an image of God were present, you would not dare
to do any of the things which you are doing: but when God himself is
present within and sees all and hears all, you are not ashamed of
thinking such things and doing such things, ignorant as you are of
your own nature and subject to the anger of God. Then why do we fear
when we are sending a young man from the school into active life, lest
he should do anything improperly, eat improperly, have improper
intercourse with women; and lest the rags in which he is wrapped
should debase him, lest fine garments should make him proud? This
youth does not know his own God: he knows not with whom he sets out.
But can we endure when he says, "I wish I had you with me." Have you
not God with you? and do you seek for any other, when you have him? or
will God tell you anything else than this? If you were a statue of
Phidias, either Athena or Zeus you would think broth of yourself and
of the artist, and if you had any understanding you would try to do
nothing unworthy of him who made you or of yourself, and try not to
appear in an unbecoming dress to those who look on you. But now
because Zeus has made you, for this reason do you care not how you
shall appear? And yet is the artist like the artist in the other? or
the work in the one case like the other? And what work of an artist,
for instance, has in itself the faculties, which the artist shows in
making it? Is it not marble or bronze, or gold or ivory? and the
Athena of Phidias when she has once extended the hand and received
in it the figure of Victory stands in that attitude forever. But the
works of God have power of motion, they breathe, they have the faculty
of using the appearances of things, and the power of examining them.
Being the work of such an artist, do you dishonor him? And what
shall I say, not only that he made you, but also intrusted you to
yourself and made you a deposit to yourself? Will you not think of
this too, but do you also dishonor your guardianship? But if God had
intrusted an orphan to you, would you thus neglect him? He has
delivered yourself to your care, and says, "I had no one fitter to
intrust him to than yourself: keep him for me such as he is by nature,
modest, faithful, erect, unterrified, free from passion and
perturbation." And then you do not keep him such.

  But some will say, "Whence has this fellow got the arrogance which
he displays and these supercilious looks?" I have not yet so much
gravity as befits a philosopher; for I do not yet feel confidence in
what I have learned and what I have assented to: I still fear my own
weakness. Let me get confidence and the, you shall see a countenance
such as I ought to have and an attitude such as I ought to have:
then I will show to you the statue, when it is perfected, when it is
polished. What do you expect? a supercilious countenance? Does the
Zeus at Olympia lift up his brow? No, his look is fixed as becomes him
who is ready to say

     Irrevocable is my word and shall not fail.

Such will I show myself to you, faithful, modest, noble, free from
perturbation. "What, and immortal too, exempt from old age, and from
sickness?" No, but dying as becomes a god, sickening as becomes a god.
This power I possess; this I can do. But the rest I do not possess,
nor can I do. I will show the nerves of a philosopher. "What nerves
are these?" A desire never disappointed, an aversion which never falls
on that which it would avoid, a proper pursuit, a diligent purpose, an
assent which is not rash. These you shall see.

  CHAPTER 9

  That when we cannot fulfill that which the character of a man
promises, we assume the character of a philosopher

  It is no common thing to do this only, to fulfill the promise of a
man's nature. For what is a man? The answer is: "A rational and mortal
being." Then, by the rational faculty, from whom are we separated?
From wild beasts. And from what others? From sheep and like animals.
Take care then to do nothing like a wild beast; but if you do, you
have lost the character of a man; you have not fulfilled your promise.
See that you do nothing like a sheep; but if you do, in this case
the man is lost. What then do we do as sheep? When we act
gluttonously, when we act lewdly, when we act rashly, filthily,
inconsiderately, to what have we declined? To sheep. What have we
lost? The rational faculty. When we act contentiously and harmfully
and passionately, and violently, to what have we declined? To wild
beasts. Consequently some of us are great wild beasts, and others
little beasts, of a bad disposition and small, whence we may say, "Let
me be eaten by a lion." But in all these ways the promise of a man
acting as a man is destroyed. For when is a conjunctive proposition
maintained? When it fulfills what its nature promises; so that the
preservation of a complex proposition is when it is a conjunction of
truths. When is a disjunctive maintained? When it fulfills what it
promises. When are flutes, a lyre, a horse, a dog, preserved? What
is the wonder then if man also in like manner is preserved, and in
like manner is lost? Each man is improved and preserved by
corresponding acts, the carpenter by acts of carpentry, the grammarian
by acts of grammar. But if a man accustoms himself to write
ungrammatically, of necessity his art will be corrupted and destroyed.
Thus modest actions preserve the modest man, and immodest actions
destroy him: and actions of fidelity preserve the faithful man, and
the contrary actions destroy him. And on the other hand contrary
actions strengthen contrary characters: shamelessness strengthens
the shameless man, faithlessness the faithless man, abusive words
the abusive man, anger the man of an angry temper, and unequal
receiving and giving make the avaricious man more avaricious.

  For this reason philosophers admonish us not to be satisfied with
learning only, but also to add study, and then practice. For we have
long been accustomed to do contrary things, and we put in practice
opinions which are contrary to true opinions. If then we shall not
also put in practice right opinions, we shall be nothing more than the
expositors of the opinions of others. For now who among us is not able
to discuss according to the rules of art about good and evil things?
"That of things some are good, and some are bad, and some are
indifferent: the good then are virtues, and the things which
participate in virtues; and the are the contrary; and the
indifferent are wealth, health, reputation." Then, if in the midst
of our talk there should happen some greater noise than usual, or some
of those who are present should laugh at us, we are disturbed.
Philosopher, where are the things which you were talking about? Whence
did you produce and utter them? From the lips, and thence only. Why
then do you corrupt the aids provided by others? Why do you treat
the weightiest matters as if you were playing a game of dice? For it
is one thing to lay up bread and wine as in a storehouse, and
another thing to eat. That which has been eaten, is digested,
distributed, and is become sinews, flesh, bones, blood, healthy
colour, healthy breath. Whatever is stored up, when you choose you can
readily take and show it; but you have no other advantage from it
except so far as to appear to possess it. For what is the difference
between explaining these doctrines and those of men who have different
opinions? Sit down now and explain according to the rules of art the
opinions of Epicurus, and perhaps you will explain his opinions in a
more useful manner than Epicurus himself. Why then do you call
yourself a Stoic? Why do you deceive the many? Why do you deceive
the many? Why do you act the part of a Jew, when you are a Greek? Do
you not see how each is called a Jew, or a Syrian or an Egyptian?
and when we see a man inclining to two sides, we are accustomed to
say, "This man is not a Jew, but he acts as one." But when he has
assumed the affects of one who has been imbued with Jewish doctrine
and has adopted that sect, then he is in fact and he is named a Jew.
Thus we too being falsely imbued, are in name Jews, but in fact we are
something else. Our affects are inconsistent with our words; we are
far from practicing what we say, and that of which we are proud, as if
we knew it. Thus being, unable to fulfill even what the character of a
man promises, we even add to it the profession of a philosopher, which
is as heavy a burden, as if a man who is unable to bear ten pounds
should attempt to raise the stone which Ajax lifted.

  CHAPTER 10

  How we may discover the duties of life from names

  Consider who you are. In the first place, you are a man; and this is
one who has nothing superior to the faculty of the will, but all other
things subjected to it; and the faculty itself he possesses unenslaved
and free from subjection. Consider then from what things you have been
separated by reason. You have been separated from wild beasts: you
have been separated from domestic animals. Further, you are a
citizen of the world, and a part of it, not one of the subservient,
but one of the principal parts, for you are capable of comprehending
the divine administration and of considering the connection of things.
What then does the character of a citizen promise? To hold nothing
as profitable to himself; to deliberate about nothing as if he were
detached from the community, but to act as the hand or foot would
do, if they had reason and understood the constitution of nature,
for they would never put themselves in motion nor desire anything,
otherwise than with reference to the whole. Therefore the philosophers
say well, that if the good man had foreknowledge of what would happen,
he would cooperate toward his own sickness and death and mutilation,
since he knows that these things are assigned to him according to
the universal arrangement, and that the whole is superior to the
part and the state to the citizen. But now, because we do not know the
future, it is our duty to stick to the things which are in their
nature more suitable for our choice, for we were made among other
things for this.

  After this, remember that you are a son. What does this character
promise? To consider that everything which is the son's belongs to the
father, to obey him in all things, never to blame him to another,
nor to say or do anything which does him injury, to yield to him in
all things and give way, cooperating with him as far as you can. After
this know that you are a brother also, and that to this character it
is due to make concessions; to be easily persuaded, to speak good of
your brother, never to claim in opposition to him any of the things
which are independent of the will, but readily to give them up, that
you may have the larger share in what is dependent on the will. For
see what a thing it is, in place of a lettuce, if it should so happen,
or a seat, to gain for yourself goodness of disposition. How great
is the advantage.

  Next to this, if you are senator of any state, remember that you are
a senator: if a youth, that you are a youth: if an old man, that you
are an old man; for each of such names, if it comes to be examined,
marks out the proper duties. But if you go and blame your brother, I
say to you, "You have forgotten who you are and what is your name." In
the next place, if you were a smith and made a wrong use of the
hammer, you would have forgotten the smith; and if you have
forgotten the brother and instead of a brother have become an enemy,
would you appear not to have changed one thing for another in that
case? And if instead of a man, who is a tame animal and social, you
are become a mischievous wild beast, treacherous, and biting, have you
lost nothing? But, you must lose a bit of money that you may suffer
damage? And does the loss of nothing else do a man damage? If you
had lost the art of grammar or music, would you think the loss of it a
damage? and if you shall lose modesty, moderation and gentleness, do
you think the loss nothing? And yet the things first mentioned are
lost by some cause external and independent of the will, and the
second by our own fault; and as to the first neither to have them
nor to lose them is shameful; but as to the second, not to have them
and to lose them is shameful and matter of reproach and a
misfortune. What does the pathic lose? He loses the man. What does
he lose who makes the pathic what he is? Many other things; and he
also loses the man no less than the other. What does he lose who
commits adultery? He loses the modest, the temperate, the decent,
the citizen, the neighbour. What does he lose who is angry?
Something else. What does the coward lose? Something else. No man is
bad without suffering some loss and damage. If then you look for the
damage in the loss of money only, all these men receive no harm or
damage; it may be, they have even profit and gain, when they acquire a
bit of money by any of these deeds. But consider that if you refer
everything to a small coin, not even he who loses his nose is in
your opinion damaged. "Yes," you say, "for he is mutilated in his
body." Well; but does he who has lost his smell only lose nothing?
Is there, then, no energy of the soul which is an advantage to him who
possesses it, and a damage to him who has lost it? "Tell me what
sort you mean." Have we not a natural modesty? "We have." Does he
who loses this sustain no damage? is he deprived of nothing, does he
part with nothing of the things which belong to him? Have we not
naturally fidelity? natural affection, a natural disposition to help
others, a natural disposition to forbearance? The man then who
allows himself to be damaged in these matters, can he be free from
harm and uninjured? "What then? shall I not hurt him, who has hurt
me?" In the first place consider what hurt is, and remember what you
have heard from the philosophers. For if the good consists in the
will, and the evil also in the will, see if what you say is not
this: "What then, since that man has hurt himself by doing an unjust
act to me, shall I not hurt myself by doing some unjust act to him?"
Why do we not imagine to something of this kind? But where there is
any detriment to the body or to our possession, there is harm there;
and where the same thing happens to the faculty of the will, there
is no harm; for he who has been deceived or he who has done an
unjust act neither suffers in the head nor in the eye nor in the
hip, nor does he lose his estate; and we wish for nothing else than
these things. But whether we shall have the will modest and faithful
or shameless and faithless, we care not the least, except only in
the school so far as a few words are concerned. Therefore our
proficiency is limited to these few words; but beyond them it does not
exist even in the slightest degree.

  CHAPTER 11

  What the beginning of philosophy is

  The beginning of philosophy to him at least who enters on it in
the right way and by the door, is a consciousness of his own
weakness and inability about necessary things. For we come into the
world with no natural notion of a right-angled triangle, or of a
diesis, or of a half tone; but we learn each of these things by a
certain transmission according to art; and for this reason those who
do not know them, do not think that they know them. But as to good and
evil, and beautiful and ugly, and becoming and unbecoming, and
happiness and misfortune, and proper and improper, and what we ought
to do and what we ought not to do, whoever came into the world without
having an innate idea of them? Wherefore we all use these names, and
we endeavor to fit the preconceptions to the several cases thus: "He
has done well, he has not done well; he has done as he ought, not as
he ought; he has been unfortunate, he has been fortunate; he is
unjust, he is just": who does not use these names? who among us defers
the use of them till he has learned them, as he defers the use of
the words about lines or sounds? And the cause of this is that we come
into the world already taught as it were by nature some things on this
matter, and proceeding from these we have added to them
self-conceit. "For why," a man says, "do I not know the beautiful
and the ugly? Have I not the notion of it?" You have. "Do I not
adapt it to particulars?" You do. "Do I not then adapt it properly?"
In that lies the whole question; and conceit is added here. For,
beginning from these things which are admitted, men proceed to that
which is matter of dispute by means of unsuitable adaptation; for if
they possessed this power of adaptation in addition to those things,
what would hinder them from being perfect? But now since you think
that you properly adapt the preconceptions to the particulars, tell me
whence you derive this. Because I think so. But it does not seem so to
another, and he thinks that he also makes a proper adaptation; or does
he not think so? He does think so. Is it possible then that both of
you can properly apply the preconceptions to things about which you
have contrary opinions? It is not possible. Can you then show us
anything better toward adapting the preconceptions beyond your
thinking that you do? Does the madman do any other things than the
things as in which seem to him right? Is then this criterion for him
also? It is not sufficient. Come then to something which is superior
to seeming. What is this?

  Observe, this is the beginning of philosophy, a perception of the
disagreement of men with one another, and an inquiry into the cause of
the disagreement, and a condemnation and distrust of that which only
"seems," and a certain investigation of that which "seems" whether
it "seems" rightly, and a discovery of some rule, as we have
discovered a balance in the determination of weights, and a
carpenter's rule in the case of straight and crooked things. This is
the beginning of philosophy. "Must we say that all thins are right
which seem so to all?" And how is it possible that contradictions
can be right? "Not all then, but all which seem to us to be right."
How more to you than those which seem right to the Syrians? why more
than what seem right to the Egyptians? why more than what seems
right to me or to any other man? "Not at all more." What then
"seems" to every man is not sufficient for determining what "is";
for neither in the case of weights or measures are we satisfied with
the bare appearance, but in each case we have discovered a certain
rule. In this matter then is there no rule certain to what "seems?"
And how is it possible that the most necessary things among men should
have no sign, and be incapable of being discovered? There is then some
rule. And why then do we not seek the rule and discover it, and
afterward use it without varying from it, not even stretching out
the finger without it? For this, I think, is that which when it is
discovered cures of their madness those who use mere "seeming" as a
measure, and misuse it; so that for the future proceeding from certain
things known and made clear we may use in the case of particular
things the preconceptions which are distinctly fixed.

  What is the matter presented to us about which we are inquiring?
"Pleasure." Subject it to the rule, throw it into the balance. Ought
the good to be such a thing that it is fit that we have confidence
in it? "Yes." And in which we ought to confide? "It ought to be." Is
it fit to trust to anything which is insecure? "No." Is then
pleasure anything secure? "No." Take it then and throw it out of the
scale, and drive it far away from the place of good things. But if you
are not sharp-sighted, and one balance is not enough for you, bring
another. Is it fit to be elated over what is good? "Yes." Is it proper
then to be elated over present pleasure? See that you do not say
that it is proper; but if you do, I shall then not think you are
worthy even of the balance. Thus things are tested and weighed when
the rules are ready. And to philosophize is this, to examine and
confirm the rules; and then to use them when they are known is the act
of a wise and good man.

  CHAPTER 12

  Of disputation or discussion

  What things a man must learn in order to be able to apply the art of
disputation, has been accurately shown by our philosophers; but with
respect to the proper use of the things, we are entirely without
practice. Only give to any of us, whom you please, an illiterate man
to discuss with,, and he cannot discover how to deal with the man. But
when he has moved the man a little, if he answers beside the
purpose, he does not know how to treat him, but he then either
abuses or ridicules him, and says, "He is an illiterate man; it is not
possible to do anything with him." Now a guide, when he has found a
man out of the road leads him into the right way: he does not ridicule
or abuse him and then leave him. Do you also show this illiterate
man the truth, and you will see that he follows. But so long as you do
not show him the truth, do not ridicule him, but rather feel your
own incapacity.

  How then did Socrates act? He used to compel his adversary in
disputation to bear testimony to him, and he wanted no other
witness. Therefore he could say, "I care not for other witnesses,
but I am always satisfied with the evidence of my adversary, and I
do not ask the opinion of others, but only the opinion of him who is
disputing with me." For he used to make the conclusions drawn from
natural notions so plain that every man saw the contradiction and
withdrew from it: "Does the envious man rejoice?" "By no means, but he
is rather pained." Well, "Do you think that envy is pain over evils?
and what envy is there of evils?" Therefore he made his adversary
say that envy is pain over good things. "Well then, would any man envy
those who are nothing to him?" "By no means." Thus having completed
the notion and distinctly fixed it he would go away without saying
to his adversary, "Define to me envy"; and if the adversary had
defined envy, he did not say, "You have defined it badly, for the
terms of the definition do not correspond to the thing defined." These
are technical terms, and for this reason disagreeable and hardly
intelligible to illiterate men, which terms we cannot lay aside. But
that the illiterate man himself, who follows the appearances presented
to him, should be able to concede anything or reject it, we can
never by the use of these terms move him to do. Accordingly, being
conscious of our own inability, we do not attempt the thing; at
least such of us as have any caution do not. But the greater part
and the rash, when they enter into such disputations, confuse
themselves and confuse others; and finally abusing their adversaries
and abused by them, they walk away.

  Now this was the first and chief peculiarity of Socrates, never to
be irritated in argument, never to utter anything abusive, anything
insulting, but to bear with abusive persons and to put an end to the
quarrel. If you would know what great power he had in this way, read
the Symposium of Xenophon, and you will see how many quarrels he put
an end to. Hence with good reason in the poets also this power is most
highly praised,

     Quickly with the skill he settles great disputes.

  Well then; the matter is not now very safe, and particularly at
Rome; for he who attempts to do it, must not do it in a corner, you
may be sure, but must go to a man of consular rank, if it so happen,
or to a rich man, and ask him, "Can you tell me, Sir, to whose care
you have entrusted your horses?" "I can tell you." Here you
entrusted them to a person indifferently and to one who has no
experience of horses? "By no means." Well then; can you tell me to
whom you entrust your gold or silver things or your vestments? "I
don't entrust even these to anyone indifferently." Well; your own
body, have you already considered about entrusting the care of it to
any person? "Certainly." To a man of experience, I suppose, and one
acquainted with the aliptic, or with the healing art? "Without a
doubt." Are these the best things that you have, or do you also
possess something else which is better than all these? "What kind of
thing do you mean?" That I mean which makes use of these things, and
tests each of these things and deliberates. "Is it the soul that you
mean?" You think right, for it is the soul that I mean. "In truth I do
think the soul is a much better thing than all the others which I
possess." Can you then show us in what way you have taken care of
the soul? for it is not likely that you, who are so wise a man and
have a reputation in the city, inconsiderately and carelessly allow
the most valuable thing that you possess to be neglected and to
perish? "Certainly not." But have you taken care of the soul yourself;
and have you learned from another to do this, or have you discovered
the means yourself? Here comes the danger that in the first place he
may say, "What is this to you, my good man, who are you?" Next, if you
persist in troubling him, there is a danger that he may raise his
hands and give you blows. I was once myself also an admirer of this
mode of instruction until I fell into these dangers.

  CHAPTER 13

  On anxiety

  When I see a man anxious, I say, "What does this man want? If he did
not want something which is not in his power, how could he be
anxious?" For this reason a lute player when he is singing by
himself has no anxiety, but when he enters the theatre, he is
anxious even if he has a good voice and plays well on the lute; for he
not only wishes to sing well, but also to obtain applause: but this is
not in his power. Accordingly, where he has skill, there he has
confidence. Bring any single person who knows nothing of music, and
the musician does not care for him. But in the matter where a man
knows nothing and has not been practiced, there he is anxious. What
matter is this? He knows not what a crowd is or what the praise of a
crowd is. However he has learned to strike the lowest chord and the
highest; but what the praise of the many is, and what power it has
in life he neither knows nor has he thought about it. Hence he must of
necessity tremble and grow pale. I cannot then say that a man is not a
lute player when I see him afraid, but I can say something else, and
not one thing, but many. And first of all I call him a stranger and
say, "This man does not know in what part of the world he is, but
though he has been here so long, he is ignorant of the laws of the
State and the customs, and what is permitted and what is not; and he
has never employed any lawyer to tell him and to explain the laws."
But a man does not write a will, if he does not does not know how it
ought to be written, or he employs a person who does know; nor does he
rashly seal a bond or write a security. But he uses his desire without
a lawyer's advice, and aversion, and pursuit, and attempt and purpose.
"How do you mean without a lawyer?" He does not know that he wills
what is not allowed, and does not will that which is of necessity; and
he does not know either what is his own or what is or what is
another man's; but if he did know, he could never be impeded, he would
never be hindered, he would not be anxious. "How so?" Is any man
then afraid about things which are not evil? "No." Is he afraid
about things which are evils, but still so far within his power that
they may not happen? "Certainly he is not." If, then, the things which
are independent of the will are neither good nor bad, and all things
which do depend on the will are within our power, and no man can
either take them from us or give them to us, if we do not choose,
where is room left for anxiety? But we are anxious about our poor
body, our little property, about the will of Caesar; but not anxious
about things internal. Are we anxious about not forming a false
opinion? No, for this is in my power. About not exerting our movements
contrary to nature? No, not even about this. When then you see a man
pale, as the physician says, judging from the complexion, this man's
spleen is disordered, that man's liver; so also say, this man's desire
and aversion are disordered, he is not in the right way, he is in a
fever. For nothing else changes the color, or causes trembling or
chattering of the teeth, or causes a man to

     Sink in his knees and shift from foot to foot.

  For this reason when Zeno was going to meet Antigonus, he was not
anxious, for Antigonus had no power over any of the things which
Zeno admired; and Zeno did not care for those things over which
Antigonus had power. But Antigonus was anxious when he was going to
meet Zeno, for he wished to please Zeno; but this was a thing
external. But Zeno did not want to please Antigonus; for no man who is
skilled in any art wishes to please one who has no such skill.

  Should I try to please you? Why? I suppose, you know the measure
by which one man is estimated by another. Have you taken pains to
learn what is a good man and what is a bad man, and how a man
becomes one or the other? Why, then, are you not good yourself? "How,"
he replies, "am I not good?" Because no good man laments or roans or
weeps, no good man is pale and trembles, or says, "How will he receive
me, how will he listen to me?" Slave, just as it pleases him. Why do
you care about what belongs to others? Is it now his fault if he
receives badly what proceeds from you? "Certainly." And is it possible
that a fault should be one man's, and the evil in another? "No." Why
then are you anxious about that which belongs to others? "Your
question is reasonable; but I am anxious how I shall speak to him."
Cannot you then speak to him as you choose? "But I fear that I may
be disconcerted?" If you are going to write the name of Dion, are
you afraid that you would be disconcerted? "By no means." Why? is it
not because you have practiced writing the name? "Certainly." Well, if
you were going to read the name, would you not feel the same? and why?
Because every art has a certain strength and confidence in the
things which belong to it. Have you then not practiced speaking? and
what else did you learn in the school? Syllogisms and sophistical
propositions? For what purpose? was it not for the purpose of
discoursing skillfully? and is not discoursing skillfully the same
as discoursing seasonably and cautiously and with intelligence, and
also without making mistakes and without hindrance, and besides all
this with confidence? "Yes." When, then, you are mounted on a horse
and go into a plain, are you anxious at being matched against a man
who is on foot, and anxious in a matter in which you are practiced,
and he is not? "Yes, but that person has power to kill me." Speak
the truth then, unhappy man, and do not brag, nor claim to be a
philosopher, nor refuse to acknowledge your masters, but so long as
you present this handle in your body, follow every man who is stronger
than yourself. Socrates used to practice speaking, he who talked as he
did to the tyrants, to the dicasts, he who talked in his prison.
Diogenes had practiced speaking, he who spoke as he did to
Alexander, to the pirates, to the person who bought him. These men
were confident in the things which they practiced. But do you walk off
to your own affairs and never leave them: go and sit in a corner,
and weave syllogisms, and propose them to another. There is not in you
the man who can rule a state.

  CHAPTER 14

  To Naso

  When a certain Roman entered with his son and listened to one
reading, Epictetus said, "This is the method of instruction"; and he
stopped. When the Roman asked him to go on, Epictetus said: Every art,
when it is taught, causes labour to him who is unacquainted with it
and is unskilled in it, and indeed the things which proceed from the
arts immediately show their use in the purpose for which they were
made; and most of them contain something attractive and pleasing.
For indeed to be present and to observe how a shoemaker learns is
not a pleasant thing; but the shoe is useful and also not disagreeable
to look at. And the discipline of a smith when he is learning is
very disagreeable to one who chances to be present and is a stranger
to the art: but the work shows the use of the art. But you will see
this much more in music; for if you are present while a person is
learning, the discipline will appear most disagreeable; and yet the
results of music are pleasing and delightful to those who know nothing
of music. And here we conceive the work of a philosopher to be
something of this kind: he must adapt his wish to what is going on, so
that neither any of the things which are taking place shall take place
contrary to our wish, nor any of the things which do not take place
shall not take place when we wish that they should. From this the
result is to those who have so arranged the work of philosophy, not to
fall in the desire, nor to fall in with that which they would avoid;
without uneasiness, without fear, without perturbation to pass through
life themselves, together with their associates maintaining the
relations both natural and acquired, as the relation of son, of
father, of brother, of citizen, of man, of wife, of neighbour, of
fellow-traveler, of ruler, of ruled. The work of a philosopher we
conceive to be something like this. It remains next to inquire how
this must be accomplished.

  We see then that the carpenter when he has learned certain things
becomes a carpenter; the pilot by learning certain things becomes a
pilot. May it not, then, in philosophy also not be sufficient to
wish to be wise and good, and that there is also a necessity to
learn certain things? We inquire then what these things are. The
philosophers say that we ought first to learn that there is a God
and that he provides for all things; also that it is not possible to
conceal from him our acts, or even our intentions and thoughts. The
next thing, is to learn what is the nature of the Gods; for such as
they are discovered to be, he, who would please and obey them, must
try with all his power to be like them. If the divine is faithful, man
also must be faithful; if it is free, man also must be free; if
beneficent, man also must be beneficent; if magnanimous, man also must
be magnanimous; as being, then an imitator of God, he must do and
say everything consistently with this fact.

  "With what then must we begin?" If you will enter on the discussion,
I will tell you that you must first understand names. "So, then, you
say that I do not now understand names?" You do not understand them.
"How, then, do I use them?" Just as the illiterate use written
language, as cattle use appearances: for use is one thing,
understanding is another. But if you think that you understand them,
produce whatever word you please, and let us try whether we understand
it. But it is a disagreeable thing for a man to be confuted who is now
old and, it may be, has now served his three campaigns. I too know
this: for now you are come to me as if you were in want of nothing:
and what could you even imagine to be wanting to you? You are rich,
you have children, and a wife, perhaps and many slaves: Caesar knows
you, in Rome you have many friends, you render their dues to all,
you know how to requite him who does you a favour, and to repay in the
same kind him who does a wrong. What do you lack? If, then, I shall
show you that you lack the things most necessary and the chief
things for happiness, and that hitherto you have looked after
everything rather than what you ought, and, to crown all, that you
neither know what God is nor what man is, nor what is good nor what is
bad; and as to what I have said about your ignorance of other matters,
that may perhaps be endured, but if I say that you know nothing
about yourself, how is it possible that you should endure me and
bear the proof and stay here? It is not possible; but you
immediately go off in bad humour. And yet what harm have I done you?
unless the mirror also injures the ugly man because it shows him to
himself such as he is; unless the physician also is supposed to insult
the sick man, when he says to him, "Man, do you think that you ail
nothing? But you have a fever: go without food to-day; drink water."
And no one says, "What an insult!" But if you say to a man, "Your
desires are inflamed, your aversions are low, your intentions are
inconsistent, your pursuits are not comfortable to nature, your
opinions are rash and false," the man immediately goes away and
says, "he has insulted me."

  Our way of dealing is like that of a crowded assembly. Beasts are
brought to be sold and oxen; and the greater part of the men come to
buy and sell, and there are some few who come to look at the market
and to inquire how it is carried on, and why, and who fixes the
meeting and for what purpose. So it is here also in this assembly:
some like cattle trouble themselves about nothing except their fodder.
For to all of you who are busy about possessions and lands and
slaves and magisterial offices, these are nothing except fodder. But
there are a few who attend the assembly, men who love to look on and
consider what is the world, who governs it. Has it no governor? And
how is it possible that a city or a family cannot continue to exist,
not even the shortest time without an administrator and guardian,
and that so great and beautiful a system should be administered with
such order and yet without a purpose and by chance? There is then an
administrator. What kind of administrator and how does he govern?
And who are we, who were produced by him, and for what purpose? Have
we some connection with him and some relation toward him, or none?
This is the way in which these few are affected, and then they apply
themselves only to this one thing, to examine the meeting and then
to go away. What then? They are ridiculed by the many, as the
spectators at the fair are by the traders; and if the beasts had any
understanding, they would ridicule those who admired anything else
than fodder.

  CHAPTER 15

  To or against those who obstinately persist in what they have
determined

  When some persons have heard these words, that a man ought to be
constant, and that the will is naturally free and not subject to
compulsion, but that all other things are subject to hindrance, to
slavery, and are in the power of others, they suppose that they
ought without deviation to abide by everything which they have
determined. But in the first place that which has been determined
ought to be sound. I require tone in the body, but such as exists in a
healthy body, in an athletic body; but if it is plain to me that you
have the tone of a frenzied man and you boast of it, I shall say to
you, "Man, seek the physician": this is not tone, but atony. In a
different way something of the same kind is felt by those who listen
to these discourses in a wrong manner; which was the case with one
of my companions who for no reason resolved to starve himself to
death. I heard of it when it was the third day of his abstinence
from food and I went to inquire what had happened. "I have
resolved," he said. But still tell me what it was which induced you to
resolve; for if you have resolved rightly, we shall sit with you and
assist you to depart; but if you have made an unreasonable resolution,
change your mind. "We ought to keep to our determinations." What are
you doing, man? We ought to keep not to all our determinations, but to
those which are right; for if you are now persuaded that it is
right, do not change your mind, if you think fit, but persist and say,
"We ought to abide by our determinations." Will you not make the
beginning and lay the foundation in an inquiry whether the
determination is sound or not sound, and so then build on it
firmness and security? But if you lay a rotten and ruinous foundation,
will not your miserable little building fall down the sooner, the more
and the stronger are the materials which you shall lay on it?
Without any reason would you withdraw from us out of life a man who is
a friend, and a companion, a citizen of the same city, both the
great and the small city? Then, while you are committing murder and
destroying a man who has done no wrong, do you say that you ought to
abide by your determinations? And if it ever in any way came into your
head to kill me, ought you to abide by your determinations?

  Now this man was with difficulty persuaded to change his mind. But
it is impossible to convince some persons at present; so that I seem
now to know, what I did not know, before, the meaning of the common
saying, "That you can neither persuade nor break a fool." May it never
be my lot to have a wise fool for my friend: nothing is more
untractable. "I am determined," the man says. Madmen are also; but the
more firmly they form a judgment on things which do not exist, the
more ellebore they require. Will you not act like a sick man and
call in the physician? "I am sick, master, help me; consider what I
must do: it is my duty to obey you." So it is here also: "I know not
what I ought to do, but I am come to learn." Not so; but, "Speak to me
about other things: upon this I have determined." What other things?
for what is greater and more useful than for you to be persuaded
that it is not sufficient to have made your determination and not to
change it. This is the tone of madness, not of health. "I will die, if
you compel me to this." Why, man? What has happened? "I have
determined." I have had a lucky escape that you have not determined to
kill me. "I take no money." Why? "I have determined." Be assured
that with the very tone which you now use in refusing to take, there
is nothing to hinder you at some time from inclining without reason to
take money and then saying, "I have determined." As in a distempered
body, subject to defluxions, the humor inclines sometimes to these
parts and then to those, so too a sickly soul knows not which way to
incline: but if to this inclination and movement there is added a
tone, then the evil becomes past help and cure.

  CHAPTER 16

  That we do not strive to use our opinions about good and evil

  Where is the good? In the will. Where is the evil? In the will.
Where is neither of them? In those things which are independent of the
will. Well then? Does any one among us think of these lessons out of
the schools? Does any one meditate by himself to give an answer to
things as in the case of questions? Is it day? "Yes." Is it night?
"No." Well, is the number of stars even? "I cannot say." When money is
shown to you, have you studied to make the proper answer, that money
is not a good thing? Have you practiced yourself in these answers,
or only against sophisms? Why do you wonder then if in the cases which
you have studied, in those you have improved; but in those which you
have not studied, in those you remain the same? When the rhetorician
knows that he has written well, that he has committed to memory what
he has written, and brings an agreeable voice, why is he still
anxious? Because he is not satisfied with having studied. What then
does he want? To be praised by the audience? For the purpose, then, of
being able to practice declamation, he has been disciplined: but
with respect to praise and blame he has not been disciplined. For when
did he hear from any one what praise is, what blame is, what the
nature of each is, what kind of praise should be sought, or what
kind of blame should be shunned? And when did he practice this
discipline which follows these words? Why then do you still wonder if,
in the matters which a man has learned, there he surpasses others, and
in those in which he has not been disciplined, there he is the same
with the many. So the lute player knows how to play, sings well, and
has a fine dress, and yet he trembles when he enters on the stage; for
these matters he understands, but he does not know what a crowd is,
nor the shouts of a crowd, nor what ridicule is. Neither does he
know what anxiety is, whether it is our work or the work of another,
whether it is possible to stop it or not. For this reason, if he has
been praised, he leaves the theatre puffed up, but if he has been
ridiculed, the swollen bladder has been punctured and subsides.

  This is the case also with ourselves. What do we admire?
Externals. About what things are we busy? Externals. And have we any
doubt then why we fear or why we are anxious? What, then, happens when
we think the things which are coming on us to be evils? It is not in
our power not to be afraid, it is not in our power not to be
anxious. Then we say, "Lord God, how shall I not be anxious?" Fool,
have you not hands, did not God make them for you, Sit down now and
pray that your nose may not run. Wipe yourself rather and do not blame
him. Well then, has he given to you nothing in the present case? Has
he not given to you endurance? has he not given to you magnanimity?
has he not given to you manliness? When you have such hands, do you
look for one who shall wipe your you st nose? But we neither study
these things nor care for them. Give me a man who cares how he shall
do anything, not for the obtaining of a thing but who cares about
his own energy. What man, when he is walking about, cares for his
own energy? who, when he is deliberating, cares about his own
deliberation, and not about obtaining that about which he deliberates?
And if he succeeds, he is elated and says, "How well we have
deliberated; did I not tell you, brother, that it is impossible,
when we have thought about anything, that it should not turn out
thus?" But if the thing should turn out otherwise, the wretched man is
humbled; he knows not even what to say about what has taken place. Who
among us for the sake of this matter has consulted a seer? Who among
us as to his actions has not slept in indifference? Who? Give to me
one that I may see the man whom I have long been looking for, who is
truly noble and ingenuous, whether young or old; name him.

  Why then are we still surprised, if we are well practiced in
thinking about matters, but in our acts are low, without decency,
worthless, cowardly, impatient of labour, altogether bad? For we do
not care about things, nor do we study them. But if we had feared
not death or banishment, but fear itself, we should have studied not
to fall into those things which appear to us evils. Now in the
school we are irritable and wordy; and if any little question arises
about any of these things, we are able to examine them fully. But drag
us to practice, and you will find us miserably shipwrecked. Let some
disturbing appearance come on us, and you will know what we have
been studying and in what we have been exercising ourselves.
Consequently, through want of discipline, we are always adding
something to the appearance and representing things to be greater than
what they are. For instance as to myself, when I am on a voyage and
look down on the deep sea, or look round on it and see no land, I am
out of my mind and imagine that I must drink up all this water if I am
wrecked, and it does not occur to me that three pints are enough. What
then disturbs me? The sea? No, but my opinion. Again, when an
earthquake shall happen, I imagine that the city is going to fall on
me; is not one little stone enough to knock my brains out?

  What then are the things which are heavy on us and disturb us?
What else than opinions? What else than opinions lies heavy upon him
who goes away and leaves his companions and friends and places and
habits of life? Now little children, for instance, when they cry on
the nurse leaving them for a short time, forget their sorrow if they
receive a small cake. Do you choose then that we should compare you to
little children? No, by Zeus, for I do not wish to be pacified by a
small cake, but by right opinions. And what are these? Such as a man
ought to study all day, and not to be affected by anything that is not
his own, neither by companion nor place nor gymnasia, and not even
by his own body, but to remember the law and to have it before his
eyes. And what is the divine law? To keep a man's own, not to claim
that which belongs to others, but to use what is given, and when it is
not given, not to desire it; and when a thing is taken away, to give
it up readily and immediately, and to be thankful for the time that
a man has had the use of it, if you would not cry for your nurse and
mamma. For what matter does it make by what thing a man is subdued,
and on what he depends? In what respect are you better than he who
cries for a girl, if you grieve for a little gymnasium, and little
porticoes and young men and such places of amusement? Another comes
and laments that he shall no longer drink the water of Dirce. Is the
Marcian water worse than that of Dirce? "But I was used to the water
of Dirce?" And you in turn will be used to the other. Then if you
become attached to this also, cry for this too, and try to make a
verse like the verse of Euripides,

     The hot baths of Nero and the Marcian water.

See how tragedy is made when common things happen to silly men.

  "When then shall I see Athens again and the Acropolis?" Wretch,
are you not content with what you see daily? have you anything
better or greater to see than the sun, the moon, the stars, the
whole earth, the sea? But if indeed you comprehend him who administers
the Whole, and carry him about in yourself, do you still desire
small stones, and a beautiful rock? When, then, you are going to leave
the sun itself and the moon, what will you do? will you sit and weep
like children? Well, what have you been doing in the school? what
did you hear, what did you learn? why did you write yourself a
philosopher, when you might have written the truth; as, "I made
certain introductions, and I read Chrysippus, but I did not even
approach the door of a philosopher." For how should I possess anything
of the kind which Socrates possessed, who died as he did, who lived as
he did, or anything such as Diogenes possessed? Do you think that
any one of such men wept or grieved, because he was not going to see a
certain man, or a certain woman, nor to be in Athens or in Corinth,
but, if it should so happen, in Susa or in Ecbatana? For if a man
can quit the banquet when he chooses, and no longer amuse himself,
does he still stay and complain, and does he not stay, as at any
amusement, only so long as he is pleased? Such a man, I suppose, would
endure perpetual exile or to be condemned to death. Will you not be
weaned now, like children, and take more solid food, and not cry after
mammas and nurses, which are the lamentations of old women? "But if
I go away, I shall cause them sorrow." You cause them sorrow? By no
means; but that will cause them sorrow which also causes you sorrow,
opinion. What have you to do then? Take away your own opinion, and
if these women are wise, they will take away their own: if they do
not, they will lament through their own fault.

  My man, as the proverb says, make a desperate effort on behalf of
tranquillity of mind, freedom and magnanimity. Lift up your head at
last as released from slavery. Dare to look up to God and say, "Deal
with me for the future as thou wilt; I am of the same mind as thou
art; I am thine: I refuse nothing that pleases thee: lead me where
thou wilt: clothe me in any dress thou choosest: is it thy will that I
should hold the office of a magistrate, that I should be in the
condition of a private man, stay there or be an exile, be poor, be
rich? I will make thy defense to men in behalf of all these
conditions. I will show the nature of each thing what it is." You will
not do so; but sit in an ox's belly, and wait for your mamma till
she shall feed you. Who would Hercules have been, if he had sat at
home? He would have been Eurystheus and not Hercules. Well, and in his
travels through the world how many intimates and how many friends
had he? But nothing more dear to him than God. For this reason it
was believed that he was the son of God, and he was. In obedience to
God, then, he went about purging away injustice and lawlessness. But
you are not Hercules and you are not able to purge away the wickedness
of others; nor yet are you Theseus, able to pure away the evil
things of Attica. Clear away your own. From yourself, from your
thoughts cast away, instead of Procrustes and Sciron, sadness, fear,
desire, envy, malevolence, avarice, effeminacy, intemperance. But it
is not possible to eject these things otherwise than by looking to God
only, by fixing your affections on him only, by being consecrated to
his commands. But if you choose anything else, you will with sighs and
groans be compelled to follow what is stronger than yourself, always
seeking tranquillity and never able to find it; for you seek
tranquillity there where it is not, and you neglect to seek it where
it is.

  CHAPTER 17

  How we must adapt preconceptions to particular cases

  What is the first business of him who philosophizes? To throw away
self-conceit. For it is impossible for a man to begin to learn that
which he thinks that he knows. As to things then which ought to be
done and ought not to be done, and good and bad, and beautiful and
ugly, all of us talking of them at random go to the philosophers;
and on these matters we praise, we censure, we accuse, we blame, we
judge and determine about principles honourable and dishonourable. But
why do we go to the philosophers? Because we wish to learn what we
do not think we know. And what is this? Theorems. For we wish to learn
what philosophers say as being something elegant and acute; and some
wish to learn that they may get profit what they learn. It is
ridiculous then to think that a person wishes to learn one thing,
and will learn another; or further, that a man will make proficiency
in that which he does not learn. But the many are deceived by this
which deceived also the rhetorician Theopompus, when he blames even
Plato for wishing everything to be defined. For what does he say? "Did
none of us before you use the words 'good' or 'just,' or do we utter
the sounds in an unmeaning and empty way without understanding what
they severally signify?" Now who tells you, Theopompus, that we had
not natural notions of each of these things and preconceptions? But it
is not possible to adapt preconceptions to their correspondent objects
if we have not distinguished them, and inquired what object must be
subjected to each preconception. You may make the same charge
against physicians also. For who among us did not use the words
"healthy" and "unhealthy" before Hippocrates lived, or did we utter
these words as empty sounds? For we have also a certain
preconception of health, but we are not able to adapt it. For this
reason one says, "Abstain from food"; another says, "Give food";
another says, "Bleed"; and another says, "Use cupping." What is the
reason? is it any other than that a man cannot properly adapt the
preconception of health to particulars?

  So it is in this matter also, in the things which concern life.
Who among us does not speak of good and bad, of useful and not useful;
for who among us has not a preconception of each of these things? Is
it then a distinct and perfect preconception? Show this. How shall I
show this? Adapt the preconception properly to the particular
things. Plato, for instance, subjects definitions to the preconception
of the useful, but you to the preconception of the useless. Is it
possible then that both of you are right? How is it possible? Does not
one man adapt the preconception of good to the matter of wealth, and
another not to wealth, but to the matter of pleasure and to that of
health? For, generally, if all of us who use those words know
sufficiently each of them, and need no diligence in resolving, the
notions of the preconceptions, why do we differ, why do we quarrel,
why do we blame one another?

  And why do I now allege this contention with one another and speak
of it? If you yourself properly adapt your preconceptions, why are you
unhappy, why are you hindered? Let us omit at present the second topic
about the pursuits and the study of the duties which relate to them.
Let us omit also the third topic, which relates to the assents: I give
up to you these two topics. Let us insist upon the first, which
presents an almost obvious demonstration that we do not properly adapt
the preconceptions. Do you now desire that which is possible and
that which is possible to you? Why then are you hindered? why are
you unhappy? Do you not now try to avoid the unavoidable? Why then
do you fall in with anything which you would avoid? Why are you
unfortunate? Why, when you desire a thing, does it not happen, and,
when you do not desire it, does it happen? For this is the greatest
proof of unhappiness and misery: "I wish for something, and it does
not happen." And what is more wretched than I?

  It was because she could not endure this that Medea came to murder
her children: an act of a noble spirit in this view at least, for
she had a just opinion what it is for a thing not to succeed which a
person wishes. Then she says, "Thus I shall be avenged on him who
has wronged and insulted me; and what shall I gain if he is punished
thus? how then shall it be done? I shall kill my children, but I shall
punish myself also: and what do I care?" This is the aberration of
soul which possesses great energy. For she did not know wherein lies
the doing of that which we wish; that you cannot get this from
without, nor yet by the alteration and new adaptation of things. Do
not desire the man, and nothing which you desire will fall to
happen: do not obstinately desire that he shall live with you: do
not desire to remain in Corinth; and, in a word, desire nothing than
that which God wills. And who shall hinder you? who shall compel
you? No man shall compel you any more than he shall compel Zeus.

  When you have such a guide, and your wishes and desires are the same
as his, why do you fear disappointment? Give up your desire to
wealth and your aversion to poverty, and you will be disappointed in
the one, you will fall into the other. Well, give them up to health,
and you will be unfortunate: give them up to magistracies, honours,
country, friends, children, in a word to any of the things which are
not in man's power. But give them up to Zeus and to the rest of the
gods; surrender them to the gods, let the gods govern, let your desire
and aversion be ranged on the side of the gods, and wherein will you
be any longer unhappy? But if, lazy wretch, you envy, and complain,
and are jealous, and fear, and never cease for a single day
complaining both of yourself and of the gods, why do you still speak
of being educated? What kind of an education, man? Do you mean that
you have been employed about sophistical syllogisms? Will you not,
if it is possible, unlearn all these things and begin from the
beginning, and see at the same time that hitherto you have not even
touched the matter; and then, commencing from this foundation, will
you not build up all that comes after, so that nothing, may happen
which you do not choose, and nothing shall fail to happen which you do
choose?

  Give me one young man who has come to the school with this
intention, who is become a champion for this matter and says, "I
give up everything else, and it is enough for me if "t shall ever be
in my power to pass my life free from hindrance and free from trouble,
and to stretch out my neck to all things like a free man, and to
look up to heaven as a friend of God, and fear nothing that can
happen." Let any of you point out such a man that I may "Come, young
man, into the possession of that which is your own, it is your destiny
to adorn philosophy: yours are these possessions, yours these books,
yours these discourses." Then when he shall have laboured sufficiently
and exercised himself in this of the matter, let him come to me
again and say, "I desire to be free from passion and free from
perturbation; and I wish as a pious man and a philosopher and a
diligent person to know what is my duty to the gods, what to my
parents, what to my brothers, what to my country, what to
strangers." Come also to the second matter: this also is yours. "But I
have now sufficiently studied the second part also, and I would gladly
be secure and unshaken, and not only when I am awake, but also when
I am asleep, and when I am filled with wine, and when I am
melancholy." Man, you are a god, you have great designs.

  "No: but I wish to understand what Chrysippus says in his treatise
of the Pseudomenos." Will you not hang yourself, wretch, with such
your intention? And what good will it do you? You will read the
whole with sorrow, and you will speak to others trembling, Thus you
also do. "Do you wish me, brother, to read to you, and you to me?"
"You write excellently, my man; and you also excellently in the
style of Xenophon, and you in the style of Plato, and you in the style
of Antisthenes." Then, having told your dreams to one another, you
return to the same things: your desires are the same, your aversions
the same, your pursuits are the same, and your designs and purposes,
you wish for the same things and work for the same. In the next
place you do not even seek for one to give you advice, but you are
vexed if you hear such things. Then you say, "An ill-natured old
fellow: when I was going away, he did not weep nor did he say, 'Into
what danger you are going: if you come off safe, my child, I will burn
lights.' This is what a good-natured man would do." It will be a great
thing for you if you do return safe, and it will be worth while to
burn lights for such a person: for you ought to be immortal and exempt
from disease.

  Casting away then, as I say, this conceit of thinking that we know
something useful, we I I must come to philosophy as we apply to
geometry, and to music: but if we do not, we shall not even approach
to proficiency, though we read all the collections and commentaries of
Chrysippus and those of Antipater and Archedemus.

  CHAPTER 18

  How we should struggle against appearances

  Every habit and faculty is maintained and increased by the
corresponding actions: the habit of walking by walking, the habit of
running by running. If you would be a good reader, read; if a
writer, write. But when you shall not have read thirty days in
succession, but have done something else, you will know the
consequence. In the same way, if you shall have lain down ten days,
get up and attempt to make a long walk, and you will see how your legs
are weakened. Generally, then, if you would make anything a habit,
do it; if you would not make it a habit, do not do it, but accustom
yourself to do something else in place of it.

  So it is with respect to the affections of the soul: when you have
been angry, you must know that not only has this evil befallen you,
but that you have also increased the habit, and in a manner thrown
fuel upon fire. When you have been overcome in sexual intercourse with
a person, do not reckon this single defeat only, but reckon that you
have also nurtured, increased your incontinence. For it is
impossible for habits and faculties, some of them not to be
produced, when they did not exist before, and others not be
increased and strengthened by corresponding acts.

  In this manner certainly, as philosophers say, also diseases of
the mind grow up. For when you have once desired money, if reason be
applied to lead to a perception of the evil, the desire is stopped,
and the ruling faculty of our mind is restored to the original
authority. But if you apply no means of cure, it no longer returns
to the same state, but, being again excited by the corresponding
appearance, it is inflamed to desire quicker than before: and when
this takes place continually, it is henceforth hardened, and the
disease of the mind confirms the love of money. For he who has had a
fever, and has been relieved from it, is not in the same state that he
was before, unless he has been completely cured. Something of the kind
happens also in diseases of the soul. Certain traces and blisters
are left in it, and unless a man shall completely efface them, when he
is again lashed on the same places, the lash will produce not blisters
but sores. If then you wish not to be of an angry temper, do not
feed the habit; throw nothing on it which will increase it: at first
keep quiet, and count the days on which you have not been angry. I
used to be in passion every day; now every second day; then every
third, then every fourth. But if you have intermitted thirty days,
make a sacrifice to God. For the habit at first begins to be weakened,
and then is completely destroyed. "I have not been vexed to-day, nor
the day after, nor yet on any succeeding day during two or three
months; but I took care when some exciting things happened." Be
assured that you are in a good way. To-day when I saw a handsome
person, I did not say to myself, "I wish I could lie with her," and
"Happy is her husband"; for he who says this says, "Happy is her
adulterer also." Nor do I picture the rest to my mind; the woman
present, and stripping herself and lying down by my side. I stroke
my head and say, "Well done, Epictetus, you have solved a fine
little sophism, much finer than that which is called the master
sophism." And if even the woman is willing, and gives signs, and sends
messages, and if she also fondle me and come close to me, and I should
abstain and be victorious, that would be a sophism beyond that which
is named "The Liar," and "The Quiescent." Over such a victory as
this a man may justly be proud; not for proposing, the master sophism.

  How then shall this be done? Be willing at length to be approved
by yourself, be willing to appear beautiful to God, desire to he in
purity with your own pure self and with God. Then when any such
appearance visits you, Plato says, "Have recourse to expiations, go
a suppliant to the temples of the averting deities." It is even
sufficient if "you resort to the society of noble and just men," and
compare yourself with them, whether you find one who is living or
dead. Go to Socrates and see him lying down with Alcibiades, and
mocking his beauty: consider what a victory he at last found that he
had gained over himself; what an Olympian victory; in what number he
stood from Hercules; so that, by the Gods, one may justly salute
him, "Hail, wondrous man, you who have conquered not less these
sorry boxers and pancratiasts nor yet those who are like them, the
gladiators." By placing these objects on the other side you will
conquer the appearance: you will not be drawn away by it. But, in
the first place, be not hurried away by the rapidity of the
appearance, but say, "Appearances, wait for me a little: let me see
who you are, and what you are about: let me put you to the test."
And then do not allow the appearance to lead you on and draw lively
pictures of the things which will follow; for if you do, it will carry
you off wherever it pleases. But rather bring in to oppose it some
other beautiful and noble appearance and cast out this base
appearance. And if you are accustomed to be exercised in this way, you
will see what shoulders, what sinews, what strength you have. But
now it is only trifling words, and nothing more.

  This is the true athlete, the man who exercises himself against such
appearances. Stay, wretch, do not be carried away. Great is the
combat, divine is the work; it is for kingship, for freedom, for
happiness, for freedom from perturbation. Remember God: call on him as
a helper and protector, as men at sea call on the Dioscuri in a storm.
For what is a greater storm than that which comes from appearances
which are violent and drive away the reason? For the storm itself,
what else is it but an appearance? For take away the fear of death,
and suppose as many thunders and lightnings as you please, and you
will know what calm and serenity there is in the ruling faculty. But
if you have once been defeated and say that you will conquer
hereafter, then say the same again, be assured that you at last be
in so wretched a condition and so weak that you will not even know
afterward that you are doing wrong, but you will even begin to make
apologies for your wrongdoing, and then you will confirm the saying of
Hesiod to be true,

     With constant ills the dilatory strives.

  CHAPTER 19

  Against those who embrace, philosophical opinions only in words

  The argument called the "ruling argument" appears to have been
proposed from such principles as these: there is in fact a common
contradiction between one another in these three positions, each two
being in contradiction to the third. The propositions are, that
everything past must of necessity be true; that an impossibility
does not follow a possibility; and that thing is possible which
neither is nor t at a t will be true. Diodorus observing this
contradiction employed the probative force of the first two for the
demonstration of this proposition, "That nothing is possible which
is not true and never will be." Now another will hold these two: "That
something is possible, which is neither true nor ever will be": and
"That an impossibility does not follow a possibility," But he will not
allow that everything which is past is necessarily true, as the
followers of Cleanthes seem to think, and Antipater copiously defended
them. But others maintain the other two propositions, "That a thing is
possible which is neither true nor will he true": and "That everything
which is past is necessarily true"; but then they will maintain that
an impossibility can follow a possibility. But it is impossible to
maintain these three propositions, because of their common
contradiction.

  If then any man should ask me which of these propositions do I
maintain? I will answer him that I do not know; but I have received
this story, that Diodorus maintained one opinion, the followers of
Panthoides, I think, and Cleanthes maintained another opinion, and
those of Chrysippus a third. "What then is your opinion?" I was not
made for this purpose, to examine the appearances that occur to me and
to compare what others say and to form an opinion of my own on the
thing. Therefore I differ not at all from the grammarian. "Who was
Hector's father?" Priam. "Who were his brothers?" Alexander and
Deiphobus. "Who was their mother?" Hecuba. I have heard this story.
"From whom?" From Homer. And Hellanicus also, I think, writes about
the same things, and perhaps others like him. And what further have
I about the ruling argument? Nothing. But, if I am a vain man,
especially at a banquet, I surprise the guests by enumerating those
who have written on these matters. Both Chrysippus has written
wonderfully in his first book about "Possibilities," and Cleanthes has
written specially on the subject, and Archedemus. Antipater also has
written not only in his work about "Possibilities," but also
separately in his work on the ruling argument. Have you not read the
work? "I have not read it." Read. And what profit will a man have from
it? he will be more trifling and impertinent than he is now; for
what else have you rained by reading it? What opinion have you
formed on this subject? none; but you will tell us of Helen and Priam,
and the island of Calypso which never was and never will be. And in
this matter indeed it is of no great importance if you retain the
story, but have formed no opinion of your own. But in matters of
morality this happens to us much more than in these things of which we
are speaking.

  "Speak to me about good and evil." Listen:

     The wind from Ilium to Ciconian shores

     Brought me.

"Of things some are good, some are bad, and others are indifferent.
The good then are the virtues and the things which partake of the
virtues; the bad are the vices, and the things which partake of
them; and the indifferent are the things which lie between the virtues
and the vices, wealth, health, life, death, pleasure, pain." Whence do
you know this? "Hellanicus says it in his Egyptian history"; for
what difference does it make to say this, or to say that "Diogenes has
it in his Ethic," or Chrysippus or Cleanthes? Have you then examined
any of these things and formed an opinion of your own? Show how you
are used to behave in a storm on shipboard? Do you remember this
division, when the sail rattles and a man, who knows nothing of
times and seasons, stands by you when you are screaming and says,
"Tell me, I ask you by the Gods, what you were saying just now. Is
it a vice to suffer shipwreck: does it participate in vice?" Will
you not take up a stick and lay it on his head? What have we to do
with you, man? we are perishing and you come to mock us? But if Caesar
sent for you to answer a charge, do you remember the distinction?
If, when you are going in, pale and trembling, a person should come up
to you and say, "Why do you tremble, man? what is the matter about
which you are engaged? Does Caesar who sits within give virtue and
vice to those who go in to him?" You reply, "Why do you also mock me
and add to my present sorrows?" Still tell me, philosopher, tell me
why you tremble? Is it not death of which you run the risk, or a
prison, or pain of the body, or banishment, or disgrace? What else
is there? Is there any vice or anything which partakes of vice? What
then did you use to say of these things? "What have you to do with me,
man? my own evils are enough for me." And you say right. Your own
evils are enough for you, your baseness, your cowardice, your boasting
which you showed when you sat in the school. Why did you decorate
yourself with what belonged to others? Why did you call yourself a
Stoic?

  Observe yourselves thus in your actions, and you will find to what
sect you belong. You will find that most of you are Epicureans, a
few Peripatetics, and those feeble. For wherein will you show that you
really consider virtue equal to everything else or even superior?
But show me a Stoic, if you can. Where or how? But you can show me
an endless number who utter small arguments of the Stoics. For do
the same persons repeat the Epicurean opinions any worse? And the
Peripatetic, do they not handle them also with equal accuracy? who
then is a Stoic? As we call a statue Phidiac which is fashioned
according to the art of Phidias; so show me a man who is fashioned
according to the doctrines which he utters. Show me a man who is
sick and happy, in danger and happy, dying and happy, in exile and
happy, in disgrace and happy. Show him: I desire, by the gods, to
see a Stoic. You cannot show me one fashioned so; but show me at least
one who is forming, who has shown a tendency to be a Stoic. Do me this
favor: do not grudge an old man seeing a sight which I have not seen
yet. Do you think that you must show me the Zeus of Phidias or the
Athena, a work of ivory and gold? Let any of you show me a human
soul ready to think as God does, and not to blame either God or man,
ready not to be disappointed about anything, not to consider himself
damaged by anything, not to be angry, not to be envious, not to be
jealous; and why should I not say it direct? desirous from a man to
become a god, and in this poor mortal body thinking of his
fellowship with Zeus. Show me the man. But you cannot. Why then do you
delude yourselves and cheat others? and why do you put on a guise
which does not belong to you, and walk about being thieves and
pilferers of these names and things which do not belong to you?

  And now I am your teacher, and you are instructed in my school.
And I have this purpose, to make you free from restraint,
compulsion, hindrance, to make you free, prosperous, happy, looking to
God in everything small and great. And you are here to learn and
practice these things. Why, then, do you not finish the work, if you
also have such a purpose as you ought to have, and if I, in addition
to the purpose, also have such qualification as I ought to have?
What is that which is wanting? When I see an artificer and material by
him, I expect the work. Here, then, is the artificer, here the
material; what is it that we want? Is not the thing, one that can be
taught? It is. Is it not then in our power? The only thing of all that
is in our power. Neither wealth is in our power, nor health, nor
reputation, nor in a word anything else except the right use of
appearances. This is by nature free from restraint, this alone is free
from impediment. Why then do you not finish the work? Tell me the
reason. For it is either through my fault that you do not finish it,
or through your own fault, or through the nature of the thing. The
thing itself is possible, and the only thing in our power. It
remains then that the fault is either in me or in you, or, what is
nearer the truth, in both. Well then, are you willing that we begin at
last to bring such a purpose into this school, and to take no notice
of the past? Let us only make a beginning. Trust to me, and you will
see.

  CHAPTER 20

  Against the Epicureans and Academics

  The propositions which are true and evident are of necessity used
even by those who contradict them: and a man might perhaps consider it
to be the greatest proof of a thing being evident that it is found
to be necessary even for him who denies it to make use of it at the
same time. For instance, if a man should deny that there is anything
universally true, it is plain that he must make the contradictory
negation, that nothing is universally true. What, wretch, do you not
admit even this? For what else is this than to affirm that whatever is
universally affirmed is false? Again, if a man should come forward and
say: "Know that there is nothing that can be known, but all things are
incapable of sure evidence"; or if another say, "Believe me and you
will be the better for it, that a man ought not to believe
anything"; or again, if another should say, "Learn from me, man,
that it is not possible to learn anything; I tell you this and will
teach you, if you choose." Now in what respect do these differ from
those? Whom shall I name? Those who call themselves Academics? "Men,
agree that no man agrees: believe us that no man believes anybody."

  Thus Epicurus also, when he designs to destroy the natural
fellowship of mankind, at the same time makes use of that which he
destroys. For what does he say? "Be not deceived men, nor be led
astray, nor be mistaken: there is no natural fellowship among rational
animals; believe me. But those who say otherwise, deceive you and
seduce you by false reasons." What is this to you? Permit us to be
deceived. Will you fare worse, if all the rest of us are persuaded
that there is a natural fellowship among us, and that it ought by
all means to be preserved? Nay, it will be much better and safer for
you. Man, why do you trouble yourself about us? Why do you keep
awake for us? Why do you light your lamp? Why do you rise early? Why
do you write so many books, that no one of us may be deceived about
the gods and believe that they take care of men; or that no one may
suppose the nature of good to be other than pleasure? For if this is
so, lie down and sleep, and lead the life of a worm, of which you
judged yourself worthy: eat and drink, and enjoy women, and ease
yourself, and snore. And what is it to you, how the rest shall think
about these things, whether right or wrong? For what have we to do
with you? You take care of sheep because they supply us with wool, and
milk, and, last of all, with their flesh. Would it not be a
desirable thing if men could be lulled and enchanted by the Stoics,
and sleep and present themselves to you and to those like you to be
shorn and milked? For this you ought to say to your brother
Epicureans: but ought you not to conceal it from others, and
particularly before everything to persuade them that we are by
nature adapted for fellowship, that temperance is a good thing; in
order that all things may be secured for you? Or ought we to
maintain this fellowship with some and not with others? With whom,
then, ought we to maintain it? With such as on their part also
maintain it, or with such as violate this fellowship? And who
violate it more than you who establish such doctrines?

  What then was it that waked Epicurus from his sleepiness, and
compelled him to write what he did write? What else was it than that
which is the strongest thing in men, nature, which draws a man to
her own will though he be unwilling and complaining? "For since,"
she says, "you think that there is no community among mankind, write
this opinion and leave it for others, and break your sleep to do this,
and by your own practice condemn your own opinions." Shall we then say
that Orestes was agitated by the Erinyes and roused from his deep
sleep, and did not more savage Erinyes and Pains rouse Epicurus from
his sleep and not allow him to rest, but compelled him to make known
his own evils, as madness and wine did the Galli? So strong and
invincible is man's nature. For how can a vine be moved not in the
mariner of a vine, but in the manner of an olive tree? or on the other
hand how can an olive tree be moved not in the manner of an olive
tree, but in the manner of a vine? It is impossible: it cannot be
conceived. Neither then is it possible for a man completely to lose
the movements of a man; and even those who are deprived of their
genital members are not able to deprive themselves of man's desires.
Thus Epicurus also mutilated all the offices of a man, and of a father
of a family, and of a citizen and of a friend, but he did not mutilate
human desires, for he could not; not more than the lazy Academics
can cast away or blind their own senses, though they have tried with
all their might to do it. What a shame is this? when a man has
received from nature measures and rules for the knowing of truth,
and does not strive to add to these measures and rules and to
improve them, but, just the contrary, endeavors to take away and
destroy whatever enables us to discern the truth?

  What say you philosopher? piety and sanctity, what do you think that
they are? "If you like, I will demonstrate that they are good things."
Well, demonstrate it, that our citizens may be turned and honor the
deity and may no longer be negligent about things of the highest
value. "Have you then the demonstrations?" I have, and I am
thankful. "Since then you are well pleased with them, hear the
contrary: 'That there are no Gods, and, if there are, they take no
care of men, nor is there any fellowship between us and them; and that
this piety and sanctity which is talked of among most men is the lying
of boasters and sophists, or certainly of legislators for the
purpose of terrifying and checking wrong-doers.'" Well done,
philosopher, you have done something for our citizens, you have
brought back all the young men to contempt of things divine. "What
then, does not this satisfy you? Learn now, that justice is nothing,
that modesty is folly, that a father is nothing, a son nothing."
Well done, philosopher, persist, persuade the young men, that we may
have more with the same opinions as you who say the same as you.
From such you an principles as those have grown our well-constituted
states; by these was Sparta founded: Lycurgus fixed these opinions
in the Spartans by his laws and education, that neither is the servile
condition more base than honourable, nor the condition of free men
more honorable than base, and that those who died at Thermopylae
died from these opinions; and through what other opinions did the
Athenians leave their city? Then those who talk thus, marry and
beget children, and employ themselves in public affairs and make
themselves priests and interpreters. Of whom? of gods who do not
exist: and they consult the Pythian priestess that they may hear lies,
and they repeat the oracles to others. Monstrous impudence and
imposture.

  Man what are you doing? are you refuting yourself every day; and
will you not give up these frigid attempts? When you eat, where do you
carry your hand to? to your mouth or to your eye? when you wash
yourself, what do you go into? do you ever call a pot a dish, or a
ladle a spit? If I were a slave of any of these men, even if I must be
flayed by him dally, I would rack him. If he said, "Boy, throw some
olive-oil into the bath," I would take pickle sauce and pour it down
on his head. "What is this?" he would say. An appearance was presented
to me, I swear by your genius, which could not be distinguished from
oil and was exactly like it. "Here give me the barley drink," he says.
I would fill and carry him a dish of sharp sauce. "Did I not ask for
the barley drink?" Yes, master; this is the barley drink. "Take it and
smell; take it and taste." How do you know then if our senses
deceive us? If I had three or four fellow-slaves of the same
opinion, I should force him to hang himself through passion or to
change his mind. But now they mock us by using all the things which
nature gives, and in words destroying them.

  Grateful indeed are men and modest, who, if they do nothing else,
are daily eating bread and yet are shameless enough to say, we do
not know if there is a Demeter or her daughter Persephone or a
Pluto; not to mention that they are enjoying the night and the day,
the seasons of the year, and the stars, and the sea, and the land, and
the co-operation of mankind, and yet they are not moved in any
degree by these things to turn their attention to them; but they
only seek to belch out their little problem, and when they have
exercised their stomach to go off to the bath. But what they shall
say, and about what things or to what persons, and what their
hearers shall learn from this talk, they care not even in the least
degree, nor do they care if any generous youth after hearing such talk
should suffer any harm from it, nor after he has suffered harm
should lose all the seeds of his generous nature: nor if we should
give an adulterer help toward being shameless in his acts; nor if a
public peculator should lay hold of some cunning excuse from these
doctrines; nor if another who neglects his parents should be confirmed
in his audacity by this teaching. What then in your opinion is good or
bad? This or that? Why then should a man say any more in reply to such
persons as these, or give them any reason or listen to any reasons
from them, or try to convince them? By Zeus one might much sooner
expect to make certainties change their mind than those who are become
so deaf and blind to their own evils.

  CHAPTER 21

  Of inconsistency

  Some things men readily confess, and other things they do not. No
one then will confess that he is a fool or without understanding; but,
quite the contrary, you will hear all men saying, "I wish that I had
fortune equal to my understanding." But readily confess that they
are timid, and they say: "I am rather timid, I confess; but to other
respects you will not find me to foolish." A man will not readily
confess that he is intemperate; and that he is unjust he will not
confess at all. He will by no means confess that be is envious or a
busybody. Most men will confess that they are compassionate. What then
is the reason? The chief thing is inconsistency and confusion in the
things which relate to good and evil. But different men have different
reasons; and generally what they imagine to be base, they do not
confess at all. But they suppose timidity to be a characteristic of
a good disposition, and compassion also; but silliness to be the
absolute characteristic of a slave. And they do not at all admit the
things which are offenses against society. But in the case of most
errors, for this reason chiefly, they are induced to confess them,
because they that there is something involuntary in them as in
timidity and compassion; and if a man confess that he is in any
respect intemperate, he alleges love as an excuse for what is
involuntary. But men do not imagine injustice to be at all There is
also in jealousy, as they suppose, something involuntary; and for this
reason they confess to jealousy also.

  Living among such men, who are so confused so ignorant of what
they say, and of evils which they have or have not, and why they
have them, or how they shall be relieved of them, I think it is
worth the trouble for a man to watch constantly "Whether I also am one
of them, what imagination I have about myself, how I conduct myself,
whether I conduct myself as a prudent man, whether I conduct myself as
a temperate man, whether I ever say this, that I have been taught to
be prepared for everything that may happen. Have I the
consciousness, which a man who knows nothing ought to have, that I
know nothing? Do I go to my teacher as men go to oracles, prepared
to obey? or do I like a sniveling boy go to my school to learn history
and understand the books which I did not understand before, and, if it
should happen so, to explain them also to others?" Man, you have had a
fight in the house with a poor slave, you have turned the family
upside down, you have frightened the neighbours, and you come to me as
if you were a wise man, and you take your seat and judge how I have
explained some word, and how I have babbled whatever came into my
head. You come full of envy, and humbled, because you bring nothing
from home; and you sit during, the discussion thinking of nothing else
than how your father is disposed toward you and your brother. "What
are they saying about me there? now they think that I am improving,
and are saying, 'He will return with all knowledge.' I wish I could
learn everything before I return: but much labour is necessary, and no
one sends me anything, and the baths at Nicopolis are dirty;
everything is bad at home, and bad here."

  Then they say, "No one gains any profit from the school." Why, who
comes to the school, who comes for the purpose of being improved?
who comes to present his opinions to he purified? who comes to learn
what he is in want of? Why do you wonder then if you carry back from
the school the very things which you bring into it? For you come not
to lay aside or to correct them or to receive other principles in
place of them. By no means, nor anything like it. You rather look to
this, whether you possess already that for which you come. You wish to
prattle about theorems? What then? Do you not become greater triflers?
Do not your little theorems give you some opportunity of display?
You solve sophistical syllogisms. Do you not examine the assumptions
of the syllogism named "The Liar"? Do you not examine hypothetical
syllogisms? Why, then, are you still vexed if you receive the things
for which you come to the school? "Yes; but if my child die or my
brother, or if I must die or be racked, what good will these things do
me?" Well, did you come for this? for this do you sit by my side?
did you ever for this light your lamp or keep awake? or, when you went
out to the walking-place, did you ever propose any appearance that had
been presented to you instead of a syllogism, and did you and your
friends discuss it together? Where and when? Then you say, "Theorems
are useless." To whom? To such as make a bad use of them. For
eyesalves are not useless to those who use them as they ought and when
they ought. Fomentations are not useless. Dumb-bells are not
useless; but they are useless to some, useful to others. If you ask me
now if syllogisms are useful, I will tell you that they are useful,
and if you choose, I will prove it. "How then will they in any way
be useful to me?" Man, did you ask if they are useful to you, or did
you ask generally? Let him who is suffering from dysentery ask me if
vinegar is useful: I will say that it is useful. "Will it then be
useful to me?" I will say, "No." Seek first for the discharge to be
stopped and the ulcers to be closed. And do you, O men, first cure the
ulcers and stop the discharge; be tranquil in your mind, bring it free
from distraction into the school, and you will know what power
reason has.

  CHAPTER 22

  On friendship

  What a man applies himself to earnestly, that he naturally loves. Do
men then apply themselves earnestly to the things which are bad? By no
means. Well, do they apply themselves to things which in no way
concern themselves? Not to these either. It remains, then, that they
employ themselves earnestly only about things which are good; and if
they are earnestly employed about things, they love such things
also. Whoever, then, understands what is good, can also know how to
love; but he who cannot distinguish good from bad, and things which
are neither good nor bad from both, can he possess the power of
loving? To love, then, is only in the power of the wise.

  "How is this?" a man may say; am foolish, and yet love my child."
I am surprised indeed that you have begun by making the admission that
you are foolish. For what are you deficient in? Can you not make use
of your senses? do you not distinguish appearances? do you not use
food which is suitable for your body, and clothing and habitation? Why
then do you admit that you are foolish? It is in truth because you are
often disturbed by appearances and perplexed, and their power of
persuasion often conquers you; and sometimes you think these things to
be good, and then the same things to be bad, and lastly neither good
nor bad; and in short you grieve, fear, envy, are disturbed, you are
changed. This is the reason why you confess that you are foolish.
And are you not changeable in love? But wealth, and pleasure and, in a
word, things themselves, do you sometimes think them to he good and
sometimes bad? and do you not think the same men at one time to be
good, at another time bad? and have you not at one time a friendly
feeling toward them and at another time the feeling of an enemy? and
do you not at one time praise them and at another time blame them?
"Yes; I have these feelings also." Well then, do you think that he who
has been deceived about a man is his friend? "Certainly not." And he
who has selected a man as his friend and is of a changeable
disposition, has he good-will toward him? "He has not." And he who now
abuses a man, and afterward admires him? "This man also has no
good-will to the other." Well then, did you never see little dogs
caressing and playing with one another, so that you might say there is
nothing more friendly? but, that you may know what friendship is,
throw a bit of flesh among them, and you will learn. Throw between
yourself and your son a little estate, and you will know how soon he
will wish to bury you and how soon you wish your son to die. Then
you will change your tone and say, "What a son I have brought up! He
has long been wishing to bury me." Throw a smart girl between you; and
do you, the old man, love her, and the young one will love her too, If
a little fame intervene, or dangers, it will be just the same. You
will utter the words of the father of Admetus!

     Life gives you pleasure: and why not your father.

Do you think that Admetus did not love his own child when he was
little? that he was not in agony when the child had a fever? that he
did not often say, "I wish I had the fever instead of the child?" then
when the test (the thing) came and was near, see what words they
utter. Were not Eteocles and Polynices from the same mother and from
the same father? Were they not brought up together, had they not lived
together, drunk together, slept together, and often kissed one
another? So that, if any man, I think, had seen them, he would have
ridiculed the philosophers for the paradoxes which they utter about
friendship. But when a quarrel rose between them about the royal
power, as between dogs about a bit of meat, see what they say,

   Polynices: Where will you take your station before the towers?

   Eteocles: Why do you ask me this?

   Pol. I place myself opposite and try to kill you.

   Et. I also wish to do the same.

Such are the wishes that they utter.

  For universally, be not deceived, every animal is attached to
nothing so much as to its own interest. Whatever then appears to it an
impediment to this interest, whether this be a brother, or a father,
or a child, or beloved, or lover, it hates, spurns, curses: for its
nature is to love nothing so much as its own interest; this is father,
and brother and kinsman, and country, and God. When, then, the gods
appear to us to be an impediment to this, we abuse them and throw down
their statues and burn their temples, as Alexander ordered the temples
of AEsculapius to be burned when his dear friend died.

  For this reason if a man put in the same place his interest,
sanctity, goodness, and country, and parents, and friends, all these
are secured: but if he puts in one place his interest, in another
his friends, and his country and his kinsmen and justice itself, all
these give way being borne down by the weight of interest. For where
the "I" and the "Mine" are placed, to that place of necessity the
animal inclines: if in the flesh, there is the ruling power: if in the
will, it is there: and if it is in externals, it is there. If then I
am there where my will is, then only shall I be a friend such as I
ought to be, and son, and father; for this will he my interest, to
maintain the character of fidelity, of modesty, of patience, of
abstinence, of active cooperation, of observing my relations. But if I
put myself in one place, and honesty in another, then the doctrine
of Epicurus becomes strong, which asserts either that there is no
honesty or it is that which opinion holds to be honest.

  It was through this ignorance that the Athenians and the
Lacedaemonians quarreled, and the Thebans with both; and the great
king quarreled with Hellas, and the Macedonians with both; and the
Romans with the Getae. And still earlier the Trojan war happened for
these reasons. Alexander was the guest of Menelaus; and if any man had
seen their friendly disposition, he would not have believed any one
who said that they were not friends. But there was cast between them a
bit of meat, a handsome woman, and about her war arose. And now when
you see brothers to be friends appearing to have one mind, do not
conclude from this anything about their friendship, not even if they
say it and swear that it is impossible for them to be separated from
one another. For the ruling principle of a bad man cannot be
trusted, it is insecure, has no certain rule by which it is
directed, and is overpowered at different times by different
appearances. But examine, not what other men examine, if they are born
of the same parents  and brought up together, and under the same
pedagogue; but examine this only, wherein they place their interest,
whether in externals or in the will. If in externals, do not name them
friends, no more than name them trustworthy or constant, or brave or
free: do not name them even men, if you have any judgment. For that is
not a principle of human nature which makes them bite one another, and
abuse one another, and occupy deserted places or public places, as
if they were mountains, and in the courts of justice display the
acts of robbers; nor yet that which makes them intemperate and
adulterers and corrupters, nor that which makes them do whatever
else men do against one another through this one opinion only, that of
placing themselves and their interests in the things which are not
within the power of their will. But if you hear that in truth these
men think the good to be only there, where will is, and where there is
a right use of appearances, no longer trouble yourself whether they
are father or son, or brothers, or have associated a long time and are
companions, but when you have ascertained this only, confidently
declare that they are friends, as you declare that they are
faithful, that they are just. For where else is friendship than
where there is fidelity, and modesty, where there is a communion of
honest things and of nothing else?

  "But," you may say, "such a one treated me with regard so long;
and did he not love me?" How do you know, slave, if he did not
regard you in the same way as he wipes his shoes with a sponge, or
as he takes care of his beast? How do you know, when you have ceased
to be useful as a vessel, he will not throw you away like a broken
platter? "But this woman is my wife, and we have lived together so
long." And how long did Eriphyle live with Amphiaraus, and was the
mother of children and of many? But a necklace came between them. "And
what is a necklace?" It is the opinion about such things. That was the
bestial principle, that was the thing which broke asunder the
friendship between husband and wife, that which did not allow the
woman to be a wife nor the mother to be a mother. And let every man
among you who has seriously resolved either to be a friend himself
or to have another for his friend, cut out these opinions, hate
them, drive them from his soul. And thus, first of all, he will not
reproach himself, he will not be at variance with himself, will not
change his mind, he will not torture himself. In the next place, to
another also, who is like himself, he will be altogether and
completely a friend. But he will bear with the man who is unlike
himself, he will be kind to him, gentle, ready to pardon on account of
his ignorance, on account of his being mistaken in things of the
greatest importance; but he will be harsh to no man, being well
convinced of Plato's doctrine that every mind is deprived of truth
unwillingly. If you cannot do this, yet you can do in all other
respects as friends do, drink together, and lodge together, and sail
together, and you may be born of the same parents; for snakes also
are: but neither will they be friends nor you, so long as you retain
these bestial and cursed opinions.

  CHAPTER 23

  On the power of speaking

  Every man will read a book with more pleasure or even with more
case, if it is written in fairer characters. Therefore every man
will also listen more readily to what is spoken, if it is signified by
appropriate and becoming words. We must not say, then, that there is
no faculty of expression: for this affirmation is the characteristic
of an impious and also of a timid man. Of an impious man, because he
undervalues the gifts which come from God, just as if he would take
away the commodity of the power of vision, or of hearing, or of
seeing. Has, then, God given you eyes to no purpose? and to no purpose
has he infused into them a spirit so strong and of such skillful
contrivance as to reach a long way and to fashion the forms of
things which are seen? What messenger is so swift and vigilant? And to
no purpose has he made the interjacent atmosphere so efficacious and
elastic that the vision penetrates through the atmosphere which is
in a manner moved? And to no purpose has he made light, without the
presence of which there would be no use in any other thing?

  Man, be neither ungrateful for these gifts nor yet forget the things
which are superior to them. But indeed for the power of seeing and
hearing, and indeed for life itself, and for the things which
contribute to support it, for the fruits which are dry, and for wine
and oil give thanks to God: but remember that he has given you
something else better than all these, I mean the power of using
them, proving them and estimating the value of each. For what is
that which gives information about each of these powers, what each
of them is worth? Is it each faculty itself? Did you ever hear the
faculty of vision saying anything about itself? or the faculty of
hearing? or wheat, or barley, or a horse or a dog? No; but they are
appointed as ministers and slaves to serve the faculty which has the
power of making use of the appearances of things. And if you inquire
what is the value of each thing, of whom do you inquire? who answers
you? How then can any other faculty be more powerful than this,
which uses the rest as ministers and itself proves each and pronounces
about them? for which of them knows what itself is, and what is its
own value? which of them knows when it ought to employ itself and when
not? what faculty is it which opens and closes the eyes, and turns
them away from objects to which it ought not to apply them and does
apply them to other objects? Is it the faculty of vision? No; but it
is the faculty of the will. What is that faculty which closes and
opens the ears? what is that by which they are curious and
inquisitive, or, on the contrary, unmoved by what is said? is it the
faculty of hearing? It is no other than the faculty of the will.
Will this faculty then, seeing that it is amid all the other faculties
which are blind and dumb and unable to see anything else except the
very acts for which they are appointed in order to minister to this
and serve it, but this faculty alone sees sharp and sees what is the
value of each of the rest; will this faculty declare to us that
anything else is the best, or that itself is? And what else does the
do when it is opened than see? But whether we ought to look on the
wife of a certain person, and in what manner, who tells us? The
faculty of the will. And whether we ought to believe what is said or
not to believe it, and if we do believe, whether we ought to be
moved by it or not, who tells us? Is it not the faculty of the will?
But this faculty of speaking and of ornamenting words, if there is
indeed any such peculiar faculty, what else does it do, when there
happens to be discourse about a thing, than to ornament the words
and arrange them as hairdressers do the hair? But whether it is better
to speak or to be silent, and better to speak in this way or that way,
and whether this is becoming or not becoming and the season for each
and the and the use, what else tells us than the faculty of the
will? Would you have it then to come forward and condemn itself?

  "What then," it says, "if the fact is so, can that which ministers
be superior to that to which it ministers, can the horse be superior
to the rider, or the do, to the huntsman, or the instrument to the
musician, or the servants to the king?" What is that which makes use
of the rest? The will. What takes care of all? The will. What destroys
the whole man, at one time by hunger, at another time by hanging,
and at another time by a precipice? The will. Then is anything
stronger in men than this? and how is it possible that the things
which are subject to restraint are stronger than that which is not
What things are naturally formed to hinder the faculty of vision? Both
will and things which do not depend on the faculty of the will. It
is the same with the faculty of hearing, with the faculty of
speaking in like manner. But what has a natural power of hindering the
will? Nothing which is independent of the will; but only the will
itself, when it is perverted. Therefore this is alone vice or alone
virtue.

  Then being so great a faculty and set over all the rest, let it come
forward and tell us that the most excellent of all things is the
flesh. Not even if the flesh itself declared that it is the most
excellent, would any person bear that it should say this. But what
is it, Epicurus, which pronounces this, which wrote about "The End
of our Being," which wrote on "The Nature of Things," which wrote
about the Canon, which led you to wear a beard, which wrote when it
was dying that it was spending the last and a happy day? Was this
the flesh or the will? Then do you admit that you possess anything
superior to this? and are you not mad? are you in fact so blind and
deaf?

  What then? Does any man despise the other faculties I hope not. Does
any man say that there is no use or excellence in the speaking
faculty? I hope not. That would be foolish, impious, ungrateful toward
God. But a man renders to each thing its due value. For there is
some use even in an ass, but not so much as in an ox: there is also
use in a dog, but not so much as in a slave: there is also some use in
a slave, but not so much as in citizens: there is also some use in
citizens, but riot so much as in magistrates. Not, indeed, because
some things are superior, must we undervalue the use which other
things have. There is a certain value in the power of speaking, but it
is not so great as the power of the will. When, then, I speak thus,
let no man think that I ask you to neglect the power of speaking,
for neither do I ask you to neglect the eyes, nor the ears nor the
hands nor the feet nor clothing nor shoes. But if you ask me, "What,
then, is the most excellent of all things?" what must I say? I
cannot say the power of speaking, but the power of the will, when it
is right. For it is this which uses the other, and all the other
faculties both small and great. For when this faculty of the will is
set right, a man who is not good becomes good: but when it falls, a
man becomes bad. It is through this that we are unfortunate, that we
are fortunate, that we blame one another, are pleased with one
another. In a word, it is this which if neglect it makes
unhappiness, and if we carefully look after it makes happiness.

  But to take away the faculty of speaking, and to say that there is
no such faculty in reality, is the act not only of an ungrateful man
toward those who gave it, but also of a cowardly man: for such a
person seems to me to fear if there is any faculty of this kind,
that we shall not be able to despise it. Such also are those who say
that there is no difference between beauty and ugliness. Then it would
happen that a man would be affected in the same way if he saw
Thersites and if he saw Achilles; in the same way, if he saw Helen and
any other woman. But these are foolish and clownish notions, and the
notions of men who know not the nature of each thing, but are
afraid, if a man shall see the difference, that he shall immediately
be seized and carried off vanquished. But this is the great matter; to
leave to each thing the power which it has, and leaving to it this
power to see what is the worth of the power, and to learn what is
the most excellent of all things, and to pursue this always, to be
diligent about this, considering t all other things of secondary value
compared with this, but yet, as far as we can, not neglecting all
those other things. For we must take care of the eyes also, not as
if they were the most excellent thing, but we must take care of them
on account of the most excellent thing, because it will not be in
its true natural condition, if it does not rightly use the other
faculties, and prefer some things to others.

  What then is usually done? Men generally act as a traveler would
do on his way to his own country, when he enters a good inn, and being
pleased with it should remain there. Man, you have forgotten your
purpose: you were not traveling to this inn, but you were pass through
it. "But this is a pleasant inn." And how many other inns are
pleasant? and how many meadows are pleasant? yet only passing through.
But your purpose is this, return to your country, to relieve your
kinsmen of anxiety, to discharge the duties of a citizen, to marry, to
beget children, to fill the usual magistracies. For you are not come
to select more pleasant places, but to live in these where you were
born and of which you were made a citizen. Something of the kind takes
place in the matter which we are considering. Since, by the aid of
speech and such communication as you receive here, you must advance to
perfection, and purge your will, and correct the faculty which makes
use of the appearances of things; and since it is necessary also for
the teaching of theorems to be effected by a certain mode of
expression and with a certain variety and sharpness, some persons
captivated by these very things abide in them, one captivated by the
expression, another by syllogisms, another again by sophisms, and
still another by some other inn of the kind; and there they stay and
waste away as if they were among Sirens.

  Man, your purpose was to make yourself capable of using
conformably to nature the appearances presented to you, in your
desires not to be frustrated, in your aversion from things not to fall
into that which you would avoid, never to have no luck, nor ever to
have bad luck, to be free, not hindered, not compelled, conforming
yourself to the administration of Zeus, obeying it, well satisfied
with this, blaming no one, charging no one with fault, able from
your whole soul to utter these verses:

     "Lead me, O Zeus, and thou, too, Destiny."

Then having this purpose before you, if some little form of expression
pleases you, if some theorems please you, do you abide among them
and choose t dwell o well there, forgetting the things at home, and do
you say, "These things are fine"? Who says that they are not fine? but
only as being a way home, as inns are. For what hinders you from being
an unfortunate man, even if you speak like Demosthenes? and what
prevents you, if you can resolve syllogisms like Chrysippus, from
being wretched, from sorrowing, from envying, in a word, from being
disturbed, from being unhappy? Nothing. You see then that these were
inns, worth nothing; and that the purpose before you was something
else. When I speak thus to some persons, they think that I am
rejecting care about speaking, or care about theorems. I am not
rejecting this care, but I am rejecting the abiding about these things
incessantly and putting our hopes in them. If a man by this teaching
does harm to those who listen to him, reckon me too among those who do
this harm: for I am not able, when I see one thing which is most
excellent and supreme, to say that another is so, in order to please
you.

  CHAPTER 24

  To a person who was one of those who was not valued by him

  A certain person said to him: "Frequently I desired to hear you
and came to you, and you never gave me any answer: and now, if it is
possible, I entreat you to say something to me." Do you think, said
Epictetus, that as there is an art in anything else, so there is
also an art in speaking, and that he who has the art, will speak
skillfully, and he who has not, will speak unskillfully? "I do think
so." He, then, who by speaking receives benefit himself and is able to
benefit others, will speak skillfully: but he who is rather damaged by
speaking and does damage to others, will he be unskilled in this art
of speaking? And you may find that some are damaged and others
benefited by speaking. And are all who hear benefited by what they
hear? Or will you find that among them also some are benefited and
some damaged? "There are both among these also," he said. In this case
also, then, those who hear skillfully are benefited, and those who
hear unskillfully are damaged? He admitted this. Is there then a skill
in hearing also, as there is in speaking? "It seems so." If you
choose, consider the matter in this way also. The practice of music,
to whom does it belong? "To a musician." And the proper making of a
statue, to whom do you think that it belongs? "To a statuary." And the
looking at a statue skillfully, does this appear to you to require the
aid of no art? "This also requires the aid of art." Then if speaking
properly is the business of the skillful man, do you see that to
hear also with benefit is the business of the skillful man? Now as
to speaking and hearing perfectly, and usefully, let us for the
present, if you please, say no more, for both of us are a long way
from everything of the kind. But I think that every man will allow
this, that he who is going to hear philosophers requires some amount
of practice in hearing. Is it not so?

  Tell me then about what I should talk to you: about what matter
are you able to listen? "About good and evil." Good and evil in
what? In a horse? "No." Well, in an ox? "No." What then? In a man?
"Yes." Do know then what a man is, what the notion is that we have
of him, or have we our ears in any degree practiced about this matter?
But do you understand what nature is? or can you even in any degree
understand me when I say, "I shall use demonstration to you?" How?
Do you understand this very thing, what demonstration is, or how
anything is demonstrated, or by what means; or what things are like
demonstration, but are not demonstration? Do you know what is true
or what is false? What is consequent on a thing, what is repugnant
to a thing, or not consistent, or inconsistent? But must I excite
you to philosophy, and how? Shall I show to you the repugnance in
the opinions of most men, through which they differ about things
good and evil, and about things which are profitable and unprofitable,
when you know not this very thing, what repugnance is? Show me then
what I shall accomplish by discoursing with you; excite my inclination
to do this. As the grass which is suitable, when it is presented to
a sheep, moves its inclination to eat, but if you present to it a
stone or bread, it will not be moved to eat; so there are in us
certain natural inclinations also to speak, when the hearer shall
appear to be somebody, when he himself shall excite us: but when he
shall sit by us like a stone or like grass, how can he excite a
man's desire? Does the vine say to the husbandman, "Take care of
me?" No, but the vine by showing in itself that it will be
profitable to the husbandman, if he does take care of it, invites
him to exercise care. When children are attractive and lively, whom do
they not invite to play with them, and crawl with them, and lisp
with them? But who is eager to play with an ass or to bray with it?
for though it is small, it is still a little ass.

  "Why then do you say nothing to me?" I can only say this to you,
that he who knows not who he is, and for what purpose he exists, and
what is this world, and with whom he is associated, and what things
are the good and the bad, and the beautiful and the ugly, and who
neither understands discourse nor demonstration, nor what is true
nor what is false, and who is not able to distinguish them, will
neither desire according to nature, nor turn away, nor move upward,
nor intend, nor assent, nor dissent, nor suspend his judgment: to
say all in a few words, he will go about dumb and blind, thinking that
he is somebody, but being nobody. Is this so now for the first time?
Is it not the fact that, ever since the human race existed, all errors
and misfortunes have arisen through this ignorance? Why did
Agamemnon and Achilles quarrel with one another? Was it not through
not knowing what things are profitable and not profitable? Does not
the one say it is profitable to restore Chryseis to her father, and
does not the other say that it is not profitable? does not the one say
that he ought to take the prize of another, and does not the other say
that he ought not? Did they not for these reasons forget both who they
were and for what purpose they had come there? Oh, man, for what
purpose did you come? to gain mistresses or to fight? "To fight." With
whom? the Trojans or the Hellenes? "With the Trojans." Do you then
leave Hector alone and draw your sword against your own king? And do
you, most excellent Sir, neglect the duties of the king, you who are
the people's guardian and have such cares; and are you quarreling
about a little girl with the most warlike of your allies, whom you
ought by every means to take care of and protect? and do you become
worse than a well-behaved priest who treats you these fine
gladiators with all respect? Do you see what kind of things
ignorance of what is profitable does?

  "But I also am rich." Are you then richer than Agamemnon? "But I
am also handsome." Are you then more handsome than Achilles? "But I
have also beautiful hair." But had not Achilles more beautiful hair
and gold-colored? and he did not comb it elegantly nor dress it.
"But I am also strong." Can you then lift so great a stone as Hector
or Ajax? "But I am also of noble birth." Are you the son of a
goddess mother? are you the son of a father sprung from Zeus? What
good then do these things do to him, when he sits and weeps for a
girl? "But I am an orator." And was he not? Do you not see how he
handled the most skillful of the Hellenes in oratory, Odysseus and
Phoenix? how he stopped their mouths?

  This is all that I have to say to you; and I say even this not
willingly. "Why?" Because you have not roused me. For what must I look
to in order to be roused, as men who are expert in are roused by
generous horses? Must I look to your body? You treat it disgracefully.
To your dress? That is luxurious. To your behavior to your look?
That is the same as nothing. When you would listen to a philosopher,
do not say to him, "You tell me nothing"; but only show yourself
worthy of hearing or fit for hearing; and you will see how you will
move the speaker.

  CHAPTER 25

  That logic is necessary

  When one of those who were present said, "Persuade me that logic
is necessary," he replied: Do you wish me to prove this to you? The
answer was, "Yes." Then I must use a demonstrative form of speech.
This was granted. How then will you know if I am cheating you by
argument? The man was silent. Do you see, said Epictetus, that you
yourself are admitting that logic is necessary, if without it you
cannot know so much as this, whether logic is necessary or not
necessary

  CHAPTER 26

  What is the property of error

  Every error comprehends contradiction: for since he who errs does
not wish to err, but to he right, it is plain that he does not do what
he wishes. For what does the thief wish to do? That which is for his
own interest. If, then, the theft is not for his interest, he does not
do that which he wishes. But every rational: soul is by nature
offended at contradiction, and so long as it does not understand
this contradiction, it is not hindered from doing contradictory
things: but when it does understand the contradiction, it must of
necessity avoid the contradiction and avoid it as much as a man must
dissent from the false when he sees that a thing is false; but so long
as this falsehood does not appear to him, he assents to it as to
truth.

  He, then, is strong in argument and has the faculty of exhorting and
confuting, who is able to show to each man the contradiction through
which he errs and clearly to prove how he does not do that which he
wishes and does that which he does not wish. For if any one shall show
this, a man will himself withdraw from that which he does; but so long
as you do not show this, do not be surprised if a man persists in
his practice; for having the appearance of doing right, he does what
he does. For this reason Socrates, also trusting to this power, used
to say, "I am used to call no other witness of what I say, but I am
always satisfied with him with whom I am discussing, and I ask him
to give his opinion and call him as a witness, and through he is
only one, he is sufficient in the place of all." For Socrates knew
by what the rational soul is moved, just like a pair of scales, and
that it must incline, whether it chooses or not. Show the rational
governing faculty a contradiction, and it will withdraw from it; but
if you do not show it, rather blame yourself than him who is not
persuaded.
DISCOURSES

                                   BOOK THREE

  CHAPTER 1

  Of finery in dress

  A certain young man a rhetorician came to see Epictetus, with his
hair dressed more carefully than was usual and his attire in an
ornamental style; whereupon Epictetus said: Tell me you do not think
that some dogs are beautiful and some horses, and so of all other
animals. "I do think so," the youth replied. Are not then some men
also beautiful and others ugly? "Certainly." Do we, then, for the same
reason call each of them in the same kind beautiful, or each beautiful
for something peculiar? And you will judge of this matter thus.
Since we see a dog naturally formed for one thing, and a horse for
another, and for another still, as an example, a nightingale, we may
generally and not improperly declare each of them to be beautiful then
when it is most excellent according to its nature; but since the
nature of each is different, each of them seems to me to be
beautiful in a different way. Is it not so? He admitted that it was.
That then which makes a dog beautiful, makes a horse ugly; and that
which makes a horse beautiful, makes a dog ugly, if it is true that
their natures are different. "It seems to be so." For I think that
what makes a pancratiast beautiful, makes a wrestler to be not good,
and a runner to be most ridiculous; and he who is beautiful for the
Pentathlon, is very ugly for wrestling. "It is so," said he. What,
then, makes a man beautiful? Is that which in its kind makes both a
dog and a horse beautiful? "It is," he said. What then makes a dog
beautiful? The possession of the excellence of a dog. And what makes a
horse beautiful? The possession of the excellence of a horse. What
then makes a man beautiful? Is it not the possession of the excellence
of a man? And do you, then, if you wish to be beautiful, young man,
labour at this, the acquisition of human excellence. But what is this?
Observe whom you yourself praise, when you praise many persons without
partiality: do you praise the just or the unjust? "The just."
Whether do you praise the moderate or the immoderate? "The
moderate." And the temperate or the intemperate? "The temperate."
If, then, you make yourself such a person, you will know that you will
make yourself beautiful: but so long as you neglect these things,
you must be ugly, even though you contrive all you can to appear
beautiful.

  Further I do not know what to say to you: for if I say to you what I
think, I shall offend you, and you will perhaps leave the school and
not return to it: and if I do not say what I think, see how I shall be
acting, if you come to me to be improved, and I shall not improve
you at all, and if you come to me as to a philosopher, and I shall say
nothing to you as a philosopher. And how cruel it is to you to leave
you uncorrected. If at any time afterward you shall acquire sense, you
will with good reason blame me and say, "What did Epictetus observe in
me that, when he saw me in such a plight coming to him in such a
scandalous condition, he neglected me and never said a word? did he so
much despair of me? was I not young? was I not able to listen to
reason? and how many other young men at this age commit many like
errors? I hear that a certain Polemon from being a most dissolute
youth underwent such a great change. Well, suppose that he did not
think that I should be a Polemon; yet he might have set my hair right,
he might have stripped off my decorations, he might have stopped me
from plucking the hair out of my body; but when he saw me dressed
like- what shall I say?- he kept silent." I do not say like what;
but you will say, when you come to your senses and shall know what
it is and what persons use such a dress.

  If you bring this charge against me hereafter, what defense shall
I make? Why, shall I say that the man will not be persuaded by me? Was
Laius persuaded by Apollo? Did he and get drunk and show no care for
the oracle? Well then, for this reason did Apollo refuse to tell him
the truth? I indeed do not know, whether you will be persuaded by me
or not; but Apollo knew most certainly that Laius would not be
persuaded and yet he spoke. But why did he speak? I say in reply:
But why is he Apollo, and why does he deliver oracles, and why has
he fixed himself in this place as a prophet and source of truth and
for the inhabitants of the world to resort to him? and why are the
words "Know yourself" written in front of the temple, though no person
takes any notice of them?

  Did Socrates persuade all his hearers to take care of themselves?
Not the thousandth part. But, however, after he had been placed in
this position by the deity, as he himself says, he never left it.
But what does he say even to his judges? "If you acquit me on these
conditions that I no longer do that which I do now, I will not consent
and I will not desist; but I will go up both to young and to old, and,
to speak plainly, to every man whom I meet, and I will ask the
questions which I ask now; and most particularly will I do this to you
my fellow-citizens, because you are more nearly related to me." Are
you so curious, Socrates, and such a busybody? and how does it concern
you how we act? and what is it that you say? "Being of the same
community and of the same kin, you neglect yourself, and show yourself
a bad citizen to the state, and a bad kinsman to your kinsmen, and a
bad neighbor to your neighbors." "Who, then are you?" Here it is a
great thing to say, "I am he whose duty it is to take care of men; for
it is not every little heifer which dares to resist a lion; but if the
bull comes up and resists him, say to the bull, if you choose, 'And
who are you, and what business have you here?'" Man, in every kind
there is produced something which excels; in oxen, in dogs, in bees,
in horses. Do not then say to that which excels, "Who, then, are you?"
If you do, it will find a voice in some way and say, "I am such a
thing as the purple in a garment: do not expect me to be like the
others, or blame my nature that it has made me different from the rest
of men."

  What then? am I such a man? Certainly not. And are you such a man as
can listen to the truth? I wish you were. But however since in a
manner I have been condemned to wear a white beard and a cloak, and
you come to me as to a philosopher, I will not treat you in a cruel
way nor yet as if I despaired of you, but I will say: Young man,
whom do you wish to make beautiful? In the first place, know who you
are and then adorn yourself appropriately. You are a human being;
and this is a mortal animal which has the power of using appearances
rationally. But what is meant by "rationally?" Conformably to nature
and completely. What, then, do you possess which is peculiar? Is it
the animal part? No. Is it the condition of mortality? No. Is it the
power of using appearances? No. You possess the rational faculty as
a peculiar thing: adorn and beautify this; but leave your hair to
him who made it as he chose. Come, what other appellations have you?
Are you man or woman? "Man." Adorn yourself then as man, not as woman.
Woman is naturally smooth and delicate; and if she has much hair (on
her body), she is a monster and is exhibited at Rome among monsters.
And in a man it is monstrous not to have hair; and if he has no
hair, he is a monster; but if he cuts off his hairs and plucks them
out, what shall we do with him? where shall we exhibit him? and
under what name shall we show him? "I will exhibit to you a man who
chooses to be a woman rather than a man." What a terrible sight! There
is no man who will not wonder at such a notice. Indeed I think that
the men who pluck out their hairs do what they do without knowing what
they do. Man what fault have you to find with your nature? That it
made you a man? What then? was it fit that nature should make all
human creatures women? and what advantage in that case would you
have had in being adorned? for whom would you have adorned yourself,
if all human creatures were women? But you are not pleased with the
matter: set to work then upon the whole business. Take away- what is
its name?- that which is the cause of the hairs: make yourself a woman
in all respects, that we may not be mistaken: do not make one half
man, and the other half woman. Whom do you wish to please? The women?,
Please them as a man. "Well; but they like smooth men." Will you not
hang yourself? and if women took delight in catamites, would you
become one? Is this your business? were you born for this purpose,
that dissolute women should delight in you? Shall we make such a one
as you a citizen of Corinth and perchance a prefect of the city, or
chief of the youth, or general or superintendent of the games? Well,
and when you have taken a wife, do you intend to have your hairs
plucked out? To please whom and for what purpose? And when you have
begotten children, will you introduce them also into the state with
the habit of plucking their hairs? A beautiful citizen, and senator
and rhetorician. We ought to pray that such young men be born among us
and brought up.

  Do not so, I entreat you by the Gods, young man: but when you have
once heard these words, go away and say to yourself, "Epictetus has
not said this to me; for how could he? but some propitious good
through him: for it would never have come into his thoughts to say
this, since he is not accustomed to talk thus with any person. Come
then let us obey God, that we may not be subject to his anger." You
say, "No." But, if a crow by his croaking signifies anything to you,
it is not the crow which signifies, but God through the crow; and if
he signifies anything through a human voice, will he not cause the man
to say this to you, that you may know the power of the divinity,
that he signifies to some in this way, and to others in that way,
and concerning the greatest things and the chief he signifies
through the noblest messenger? What else is it which the poet says:

    For we ourselves have warned him, and have sent

    Hermes the careful watcher, Argus' slayer,

    The husband not to kill nor wed the wife.

Was Hermes going to descend from heaven to say this to him? And now
the Gods say this to you and send the messenger, the slayer of
Argus, to warn you not to pervert that which is well arranged, nor
to busy yourself about it, but to allow a man to be a man, and a woman
to be a woman, a beautiful man to be as a beautiful man, and an ugly
man as an ugly man, for you are not flesh and hair, but you are
will; and if your will beautiful, then you will be beautiful. But up
the present time I dare not tell you that you are ugly, for I think
that you are readier to hear anything than this. But see what Socrates
says to the most beautiful and blooming of men Alcibiades: "Try, then,
to be beautiful." What does he say to him? "Dress your hair and
pluck the hairs from your legs." Nothing of that kind. But "Adorn your
will, take away bad opinions." "How with the body?" Leave it as it
is by nature. Another has looked after these things: intrust them to
him. "What then, must a man be uncleaned?" Certainly not; but what you
are and are made by nature, cleanse this. A man should be cleanly as a
man, a woman as a woman, a child as a child. You say no: but let us
also pluck out the lion's mane, that he may not be uncleaned, and
the cock's comb for he also ought to he cleaned. Granted, but as a
cock, and the lion as a lion, and the hunting dog as a hunting dog.

  CHAPTER 2

  In what a man ought to be exercised who has made proficiency; and
that we neglect the chief things

  There are three things in which a man ought to exercise himself
who would be wise and good. The first concerns the desires and the
aversions, that a man may not fail to get what he desires, and that he
may not fall into that which he does not desire. The second concerns
the movements (toward) and the movements from an object, and generally
in doing what a man ought to do, that he may act according to order,
to reason, and not carelessly. The third thing concerns freedom from
deception and rashness in judgement, and generally it concerns the
assents. Of these topics the chief and the most urgent is that which
relates to the affects; for an affect is produced in no other way than
by a failing to obtain that which a man desires or a falling into that
which a man would wish to avoid. This is that which brings in
perturbations, disorders, bad fortune, misfortunes, sorrows,
lamentations and envy; that which makes men envious and jealous; and
by these causes we are unable even to listen to the precepts of
reason. The second topic concerns the duties of a man; for I ought not
to be free from affects like a statue, but I ought to maintain the
relations natural and acquired, as a pious man, as a son, as a father,
as a citizen.

  The third topic is that which immediately concerns those who are
making proficiency, that which concerns the security of the other two,
so that not even in sleep any appearance unexamined may surprise us,
nor in intoxication, nor in melancholy. "This," it may be said, "is
above our power." But the present philosophers neglecting the first
topic and the second, employ themselves on the third, using
sophistical arguments, making conclusions from questioning,
employing hypotheses, lying. "For a man must," as it is said, "when
employed on these matters, take care that he is not deceived." Who
must? The wise and good man. This then is all that is wanting to
you. Have you successfully worked out the rest? Are you free from
deception in the matter of money? If you see a beautiful girl, do
you resist the appearance? If your neighbor obtains an estate by will,
are you not vexed? Now is there nothing else wanting to you except
unchangeable firmness of mind? Wretch, you hear these very things with
fear and anxiety that some person may despise you, and with
inquiries about what any person may say about you. And if a man come
and tell you that in a certain conversation in which the question was,
"Who is the best philosopher," a man who was present said that a
certain person was the chief philosopher, your little soul which was
only a finger's length stretches out to two cubits. But if another who
is present "You are mistaken; it is not worth while to listen to a
certain person, for what does he know? he has only the first
principles, and no more?" then you are confounded, you grow pale,
you cry out immediately, "I will show him who I am, that I am a
great philosopher." It is seen by these very things: why do you wish
to show it by others? Do you not know that Diogenes pointed out one of
the sophists in this way by stretching out his middle finger? And then
when the man was wild with rage, "This," he said, "is the certain
person: I pointed him out to you." For a man is not shown by the
finger, as a stone or a piece of wood: but when any person shows the
man s principles, then he shows him as a man.

  Let us look at your principles also. For is it not plain that you
value not at all your own will, but you look externally to things
which are independent of your will? For instance, what will a
certain person say? and what will people think of you? will you be
considered a man of learning; have you read Chrysippus or Antipater?
for if you have read Archedemus also, you have everything. Why are you
still uneasy lest you should not show us who you are? Would you let me
tell you what manner of man you have shown us that you are? You have
exhibited yourself to us as a mean fellow, querulous, passionate,
cowardly, finding fault with everything, blaming everybody, never
quiet, vain: this is what you have exhibited to us. Go away now and
read Archedemus; then, if a mouse should leap down and make a noise,
you are a dead man. For such a death awaits you as it did- what was
the man's name?- Crinis; and he too was proud, because he understood
Archedemus.

  Wretch, will you not dismiss these things that do not concern you at
all? These things are suitable to those who are able to learn them
without perturbation, to those who can say: "I am not subject to
anger, to grief, to envy: I am not hindered, I am not restrained. What
remains for me? I have leisure, I am tranquil: let us see how we
must deal with sophistical arguments; let us see how when a man has
accepted an hypothesis he shall not be led away to anything absurd."
To them such things belong. To those who are happy it is appropriate
to light a fire, to dine; if they choose, both to sing and to dance.
But when the vessel is sinking, you come to me and hoist the sails.

  CHAPTER 3

  What is the matter on which a good man should he employed, and in
what we ought chiefly to practice ourselves

  The material for the wise and good man is his own ruling faculty:
and the body is the material for the physician and the aliptes; the
land is the matter for the husbandman. The business of the wise and
good man is to use appearances conformably to nature: and as it is the
nature of every soul to assent to the truth, to dissent from the
false, and to remain in suspense as to that which is uncertain; so
it is its nature to be moved toward the desire of the good, and to
aversion from the evil; and with respect to that which is neither good
nor bad it feels indifferent. For as the money-changer is not
allowed to reject Caesar's coin, nor the seller of herbs, but if you
show the coin, whether he chooses or not, he must give up what is sold
for the coin; so it is also in the matter of the soul. When the good
appears, it immediately attracts to itself; the evil repels from
itself. But the soul will never reject the manifest appearance of
the good, any more than persons will reject Caesar's coin. On this
principle depends every movement both of man and God.

  For this reason the good is preferred to every intimate
relationship. There is no intimate relationship between me and my
father, but there is between me and the good. "Are you so
hard-hearted?" Yes, for such is my nature; and this is the coin
which God has given me. For this reason, if the good is something
different from the beautiful and the just, both father is gone, and
brother and country, and everything. But shall I overlook my own good,
in order that you may have it, and shall I give it up to you? Why?
"I am your father." But you are not my good. "I am your brother."
But you are not my good. But if we place the good in a right
determination of the will, the very observance of the relations of
life is good, and accordingly he who gives up any external things
obtains that which is good. Your father takes away your property.
But he does not injure you. Your brother will have the greater part of
the estate in land. Let him have as much as he chooses. Will he then
have a greater share of modesty, of fidelity, of brotherly
affection? For who will eject you from this possession? Not even Zeus,
for neither has he chosen to do so; but he has made this in my own
power, and he has given it to me just as he possessed it himself, free
from hindrance, compulsion, and impediment. When then the coin which
another uses is a different coin, if a man presents this coin, he
receives that which is sold for it. Suppose that there comes into
the province a thievish proconsul, what coin does he use? Silver coin.
Show it to him, and carry off what you please. Suppose one comes who
is an adulterer: what coin does he use? Little girls. "Take," a man
says, "the coin, and sell me the small thing." "Give," says the
seller, "and buy." Another is eager to possess boys. Give him the
coin, and receive what you wish. Another is fond of hunting: give
him a fine nag or a dog. Though he groans and laments, he will sell
for it that which you want. For another compels him from within, he
who has fixed this coin.

  Against this kind of thing chiefly a man should exercise himself. As
soon as you go out in the morning, examine every man whom you see,
every man whom you hear; answer as to a question, "What have you
seen?" A handsome man or woman? Apply the rule: Is this independent of
the will, or dependent? Independent. Take it away. What have you seen?
A man lamenting over the death of a child. Apply the rule. Death is
a thing independent of the will. Take it away. Has the proconsul met
you? Apply the rule. What kind of thing is a proconsul's office?
Independent of the will, or dependent on it? Independent. Take this
away also: it does not stand examination: cast it away: it is
nothing to you.

  If we practiced this and exercised ourselves in it daily from
morning to night, something indeed would be done. But now we are
forthwith caught half-asleep by every appearance, and it is only, if
ever, that in the school we are roused a little. Then when we go
out, if we see a man lamenting, we say, "He is undone." If we see a
consul, we say, "He is happy." If we see an exiled man, we say, "He is
miserable." If we see a poor man, we say, "He is wretched: he has
nothing to eat."

  We ought then to eradicate these bad opinions, and to this end we
should direct all our efforts. For what is weeping and lamenting?
Opinion. What is bad fortune? Opinion. What is civil sedition, what is
divided opinion, what is blame, what is accusation, what is impiety,
what is trifling? All these things are opinions, and nothing more, and
opinions about things independent of the will, as if they were good
and bad. Let a man transfer these opinions to things dependent on
the will, and I engage for him that he will be firm and constant,
whatever may be the state of things around him. Such as is a dish of
water, such is the soul. Such as is the ray of light which falls on
the water, such are the appearances. When the water is moved, the
ray also seems to be moved, yet it is not moved. And when, then, a man
is seized with giddiness, it is not the arts and the virtues which are
confounded, but the spirit on which they are impressed; but if the
spirit be restored to its settled state, those things also are
restored.

  CHAPTER 4

  Against a person who showed his partisanship in an unseemly way in a
theatre

  The governor of Epirus having shown his favor to an actor in an
unseemly way and being publicly blamed on this account, and
afterward having reported to Epictetus that he was blamed and that
he was vexed at those who blamed him, Epictetus said: What harm have
they been doing? These men also were acting, as partisans, as you were
doing. The governor replied, "Does, then, any person show his
partisanship in this way?" When they see you, said Epictetus, who
are their governor, a friend of Caesar and his deputy, showing
partisanship in this way, was it not to be expected that they also
should show their partisanship in the same way? for if it is not right
to show partisanship in this way, do not do so yourself; and if it
is right, why are you angry if they followed your example? For whom
have the many to imitate except you, who are their superiors, to whose
example should they look when they go to the theatre except yours?
"See how the deputy of Caesar looks on: he has cried out, and I too,
then, will cry out. He springs up from his seat, and I will spring up.
His slaves sit in various parts of the theatre and call out. I have no
slaves, but I will myself cry out as much as I can and as loud as
all of them together." You ought then to know when you enter the
theatre that you enter as a rule and example to the rest how they
ought to look at the acting. Why then did they blame you? Because
every man hates that which is a hindrance to him. They wished one
person to be crowned; you wished another. They were a hindrance to
you, and you were a hindrance to them. You were found to be the
stronger; and they did what they could; they blamed that which
hindered them. What, then, would you have? That you should do what you
please, and they should not even say what they please? And what is the
wonder? Do not the husbandmen abuse Zeus when they are hindered by
him? do not the sailors abuse him? do they ever cease abusing
Caesar? What then does not Zeus know? is not what is said reported
to Caesar? What, then, does he do? he knows that, if he punished all
who abuse him, he would have nobody to rule over. What then? when
you enter the theatre, you ought to say not, "Let Sophron be crowned",
but you ought to say this, "Come let me maintain my will in this
matter so that it shall be conformable to nature: no man is dearer
to me than myself. It would be ridiculous, then, for me to be hurt
(injured) in order that another who is an actor may be crowned." Whom
then do I wish to gain the prize? Why the actor who does gain the
prize; and so he will always gain the prize whom I wish to gain it.
"But I wish Sophron to be crowned." Celebrate as many games as you
choose in your own house, Nemean, Pythian, Isthmian, Olympian, and
proclaim him victor. But in public do not claim more than your due,
nor attempt to appropriate to yourself what belongs to all. If you
do not consent to this, bear being abused: for when you do the same as
the many, you put yourself on the same level with them.

  CHAPTER 5

  Against those who on account of sickness go away home

  "I am sick here," said one of the pupils, "and I wish to return
home." At home, I suppose, you free from sickness. Do you not consider
whether you are doing, anything here which may be useful to the
exercise of your will, that it may be corrected? For if you are
doing nothing toward this end, it was to no purpose that you came.
Go away. Look after your affairs at home. For if your ruling power
cannot be maintained in a state conformable to nature, it is
possible that your land can, that you will he able to increase your
money, you will take care of your father in his old age, frequent
the public place, hold magisterial office: being bad you will do badly
anything else that you have to do. But if you understand yourself, and
know that you are casting away certain bad opinions and adopting
others in their place, and if you have changed your state of life from
things which are not within your will to things which are within
your will, and if you ever say, "Alas!" you are not saying what you
say on account of your father, or your brother, but on account of
yourself, do you still allege your sickness? Do you not know that both
disease and death must surprise us while we are doing something? the
husbandman while he is tilling the ground, the sailor while he is on
his voyage? what would you be doing when death surprises you, for
you must be surprised when you are doing something? If you can be
doing anything better than this when you are surprised, do it. For I
wish to be surprised by disease or death when I am looking after
nothing else than my that may be free from perturbation, own will that
I may be free from hindrance, free from compulsion, and in a state
of liberty. I wish to be found practicing these things that I may be
able to say to God, "Have I in any respect transgressed thy
commands? have I in any respect wrongly used the powers which Thou
gavest me? have I misused my perceptions or my preconceptions? have
I ever blamed Thee? have I ever found fault with Thy administration? I
have been sick, because it was Thy will, and so have others, but I was
content to be sick. I have been poor because it was Thy will, but I
was content also. I have not filled a magisterial office, because it
was not Thy pleasure that I should: I have never desired it. Hast Thou
ever seen me for this reason discontented? have I not always
approached Thee with a cheerful countenance, ready to do Thy
commands and to obey Thy signals? Is it now Thy will that I should
depart from the assemblage of men? I depart. I give Thee all thanks
that Thou hast allowed me to join in this Thy assemblage of men and to
see Thy works, and to comprehend this Thy administration." May death
surprise me while I am thinking of these things, while I am thus
writing and reading.

  "But my mother will not hold my head when I am sick." Go to your
mother then; for you are a fit person to have your head held when
you are sick. "But at home I used to lie down on a delicious bed."
Go away to your bed: indeed you are fit to lie on such a bed even when
you are in health: do not, then, lose what you can do there.

  But what does Socrates say? "As one man," he says, "is pleased
with improving his land, another with improving his horse, so I am
daily pleased in observing that I am growing better." "Better in what?
in using nice little words?" Man, do not say that. "In little
matters of speculation?" What are you saying? "And indeed I do not see
what else there is on which philosophers employ their time." Does it
seem nothing to you to have never found fault with any person, neither
with God nor man? to have blamed nobody? to carry the same face always
in going out and coming in? This is what Socrates knew, and yet he
never said that he knew anything or taught anything. But if any man
asked for nice little words or little speculations, he would carry him
to Protagoras or to Hippias; and if any man came to ask for pot-herbs,
he would carry him to the gardener. Who then among you has this
purpose? for if indeed you had it, you would both be content in
sickness, and in hunger, and in death. If any among you has been in
love with a charming girl, he knows that I say what is true.

  CHAPTER 6

  Miscellaneous

  When some person asked him how it happened that since reason has
been more cultivated by the men of the present age, the progress
made in former times was greater. In what respect, he answered, has it
been more cultivated now, and in what respect was the progress greater
then? For in that in which it has now been more cultivated, in that
also the progress will now be found. At present it has been cultivated
for the purpose of resolving syllogisms, and progress is made. But
in former times it was cultivated for the purpose of maintaining the
governing faculty in a condition conformable to nature, and progress
was made. Do not, then, mix things which are different and do not
expect, when you are laboring at one thing, to make progress in
another. But see if any man among us when he is intent see I upon
this, the keeping himself in a state conformable to nature and
living so always, does not make progress. For you will not find such a
man.

  The good man is invincible, for he does not enter the contest
where he is not stronger. If you want to have his land and all that is
on it, take the land; take his slaves, take his magisterial office,
take his poor body. But you will not make his desire fail in that
which it seeks, nor his aversion fall into that which he would
avoid. The only contest into which he enters is that about things
which are within the power of his will; how then will he not be
invincible?

  Some person having asked him what is Common sense, Epictetus
replied: As that may be called a certain Common hearing which only
distinguishes vocal sounds, and that which distinguishes musical
sounds is not Common, but artificial; so there are certain things
which men, who are not altogether perverted, see by the common notions
which all possess. Such a constitution of the mind is named Common
sense.

  It is not easy to exhort weak young men; for neither is it easy to
hold cheese with a hook. But those who have a good natural
disposition, even if you try to turn them aside, cling still more to
reason. Wherefore Rufus generally attempted to discourage, and he used
this method as a test of those who had a good natural disposition
and those who had not. "For," it was his habit to say, "as a stone, if
you cast it upward, will be brought down to the earth by its own
nature, so the man whose mind is naturally good, the more you repel
him, the more he turns toward that to which he is naturally inclined."

  CHAPTER 7

  To the administrator of the free cities who was an Epicurean

  When the administrator came to visit him, and the man was an
Epicurean, Epictetus said: It is proper for us who are not
philosophers to inquire of you who are philosophers, as those who come
to a strange city inquire of the citizens and those who are acquainted
with it, what is the best thing in the world, in order that we also,
after inquiry, may go in quest of that which is best and look at it,
as strangers do with the things in cities. For that there are three
things which relate to man, soul, body, and things external,
scarcely any man denies. It remains for you philosophers to answer
what is the best. What shall we say to men? Is the flesh the best? and
was it for this that Maximus sailed as far as Cassiope in winter
with his son, and accompanied him that he might be gratified in the
flesh? Then the man said that it was not, and added, "Far be that from
him." Is it not fit then, Epictetus said, to be actively employed
about the best? "It is certainly of all things the most fit." What,
then, do we possess which is better than the flesh? "The soul," he
replied. And the good things of the best, are they better, or the good
things of the worse? "The good things of the best." And are the good
things of the best within the power of the will or not within the
power of the will? "They are within the power of the will." Is,
then, the pleasure of the soul a thing within the power of the will?
"It is," he replied. And on what shall this pleasure depend? On
itself? But that cannot be conceived: for there must first exist a
certain substance or nature of good, by obtaining which we shall
have pleasure in the soul. He assented to this also. On what, then,
shall we depend for this pleasure of the soul? for if it shall
depend on things of the soul, the substance of the good is discovered;
for good cannot be one thing, and that at which we are rationally
delighted another thing; nor if that which precedes is not good, can
that which comes after be good, for in order that the thing which
comes after may be good, that which precedes must be good. But you
would not affirm this, if you are in your right mind, for you would
then say what is inconsistent both with Epicurus and the rest of
your doctrines. It remains, then, that the pleasure of the soul is
in the pleasure from things of the body: and again that those bodily
things must be the things which precede and the substance of the good.

  For this reason Maximus acted foolishly if he made the voyage for
any other reason than for the sake of the flesh, that is, for the sake
of the best. And also a man acts foolishly if he abstains from that
which belongs to others, when he is a judge and able to take it.
But, if you please, let us consider this only, how this thing may be
done secretly, and safely, and so that no man will know it. For not
even does Epicurus himself declare stealing to be bad, but he admits
that detection is; and because it is impossible to have security
against detection, for this reason he says, "Do not steal." But I
say to you that if stealing is done cleverly and cautiously, we
shall not be detected: further also we have powerful friends in Rome
both men and women, and the Hellenes are weak, and no man will venture
to go up to Rome for the purpose. Why do you refrain from your own
good? This is senseless, foolish. But even if you tell me that you
do refrain, I will not believe you. For as it is impossible to
assent to that which appears false, and to turn away from that which
is true, so it is impossible to abstain from that which appears
good. But wealth is a good thing, and certainly most efficient in
producing pleasure. Why will you not acquire wealth? And why should we
not corrupt our neighbor's wife, if we can do it without detection?
and if the husband foolishly prates about the matter, why not pitch
him out of the house? If you would be a philosopher such as you
ought to be, if a perfect philosopher, if consistent with your own
doctrines. If you would not, you will not differ at all from us who
are called Stoics; for we also say one thing, but we do another: we
talk of the things which are beautiful, but we do what is base. But
you will be perverse in the contrary way, teaching what is bad,
practicing what is good.

  In the name of God, are you thinking of a city of Epicureans? "I
do not marry." "Nor I, for a man ought not to marry; nor ought we to
beget children, nor engage in public matters." What then will
happen? whence will the citizens come? who will bring them up? who
will be governor of the youth, who preside wi over gymnastic
exercises? and in what also will the teacher instruct them? will he
teach them what the Lacedaemonians were taught, or what the
Athenians were taught? Come take a young man, bring him up according
to your doctrines. The doctrines are bad, subversive of a state,
pernicious to families, and not becoming to women. Dismiss them,
man. You live in a chief city: it is your duty to be a magistrate,
to judge justly, to abstain from that which belongs to others; no
woman ought to seem beautiful to you except your own wife, and no
youth, no vessel of silver, no vessel of gold. Seek for doctrines
which are consistent with what I say, and, by making them your
guide, you will with pleasure abstain from things which have such
persuasive power to lead us and overpower us. But if to the persuasive
power of these things, we also devise such a philosophy as this
which helps to push us on toward them and strengthens us to this
end, what will be the consequence? In a piece of toreutic art which is
the best part? the silver or the workmanship? The substance of the
hand is the flesh; but the work of the hand is the principal part. The
duties then are also three; those which are directed toward the
existence of a thing; those which are directed toward its existence in
a particular kind; and third, the chief or leading things
themselves. So also in man we ought not to value the material, the
poor flesh, but the principal. What are these? Engaging in public
business, marrying, begetting children, venerating God, taking care of
parents, and, generally, having desires, aversions, pursuits of things
and avoidances, in the way in which we ought to do these things, and
according to our nature. And how are we constituted by nature? Free,
noble, modest: for what other animal blushes? what other is capable of
receiving the appearance of shame? and we are so constituted by nature
as to subject pleasure to these things, as a minister, a servant, in
order that it may call forth our activity, in order that it may keep
us constant in acts which are conformable to nature.

  "But I am rich and I want nothing." Why, then, do you pretend to
be a philosopher? Your golden and your silver vessels are enough for
you. What need have you of principles? "But I am also a judge of the
Greeks." Do you know how to judge? Who taught you to know? "Caesar
wrote to me a codicil." Let him write and give you a commission to
judge of music; and what will be the use of it to you? Still how did
you become a judge? whose hand did you kiss? the hand of Symphorus
or Numenius? Before whose bedchamber have you slept? To whom have
you sent gifts? Then do you not see that to be a judge is just of
the same value as Numenius is? "But I can throw into prison any man
whom I please." So you can do with a stone. "But I can beat with
sticks whom I please." So you may an ass. This is not a governing of
men. Govern us as rational animals: show us what is profitable to
us, and we will follow it: show us what is unprofitable, and we will
turn away from it. Make us imitators of yourself, as Socrates made men
imitators of himself. For he was like a governor of men, who made them
subject to him their desires, their aversion, their movements toward
an object and their turning away from it. "Do this: do not do this: if
you do not obey, I will throw you into prison." This is not
governing men like rational animals. But I: As Zeus has ordained, so
act: if you do not act so, you will feel the penalty, you will be
punished. What will be the punishment? Nothing else than not having
done your duty: you will lose the character of fidelity, modesty,
propriety. Do not look for greater penalties than these.

  CHAPTER 8

  How we must exercise ourselves against appearances

  As we exercise ourselves against sophistical questions, so we
ought to exercise ourselves daily against appearances; for these
appearances also propose questions to us. "A certain person son is
dead." Answer: the thing is not within the power of the will: it is
not an evil. "A father has disinherited a certain son. What do you
think of it?" It is a thing beyond the power of the will, not an evil.
"Caesar has condemned a person." It is a thing beyond the power of the
will, not an evil. "The man is afflicted at this." Affliction is a
thing which depends on the will: it is an evil. He has borne the
condemnation bravely." That is a thing within the power of the will:
it is a good. If we train ourselves in this manner, we shall make
progress; for we shall never assent to anything of which there is
not an appearance capable of being comprehended. Your son is dead.
What has happened? Your son is dead. Nothing more? Nothing. Your
ship is lost. What has happened? Your ship is lost. A man has been led
to prison. What has happened? He has been led to prison. But that
herein he has fared badly, every man adds from his own opinion. "But
Zeus," you say, "does not do right in these matters." Why? because
he has made you capable of endurance? because he has made you
magnanimous? because he has taken from that which befalls you the
power of being evil? because it is in your power to be happy while you
are suffering what you suffer; because he has opened the door to
you, when things do not please you? Man, go out and do not complain.

  Hear how the Romans feel toward philosophers, if you would like to
know. Italicus, who was the most in repute of the philosophers, once
when I was present being, vexed with his own friends and as if he
was suffering something intolerable said, "I cannot bear it, you are
killing me: you will make me such as that man is"; pointing to me.

  CHAPTER 9

  To a certain rhetorician who was going up to Rome on a suit

  When a certain person came to him, who was going up to Rome on
account of a suit which had regard to his rank, Epictetus inquired the
reason of his going to Rome, and the man then asked what he thought
about the matter. Epictetus replied: If you ask me what you will do in
Rome, whether you will succeed or fall, I have no rule about this. But
if you ask me how you will fare, I can tell you: if you have right
opinions, you will fare well; if they are false, you will fare ill.
For to every man the cause of his acting is opinion. For what is the
reason why you desired to be elected governor of the Cnossians? Your
opinion. What is the reason that you are now going up to Rome? Your
opinion. And going in winter, and with danger and expense. "I must
go." What tells you this? Your opinion. Then if opinions are the
causes of all actions, and a man has bad opinions, such as the cause
may be, such also is the effect. Have we then all sound opinions, both
you and your adversary? And how do you differ? But have you sounder
opinions than your adversary? Why? You think so. And so does he
think that his opinions are better; and so do madmen. This is a bad
criterion. But show to me that you have made some inquiry into your
opinions and have taken some pains about them. And as now you are
sailing to Rome in order to become governor of the Cnossians, and
you are not content to stay at home with the honors which you had, but
you desire something greater and more conspicuous, so when did you
ever make a voyage for the purpose of examining your own opinions, and
casting them out, if you have any that are bad? Whom have you
approached for this purpose? What time have you fixed for it? What
age? Go over the times of your life by yourself, if you are ashamed of
me. When you were a boy, did you examine your own opinions? and did
you not then, as you do all things now, do as you did do? and when you
were become a youth and attended the rhetoricians, and yourself
practiced rhetoric, what did you imagine that you were deficient in?
And when you were a young man and engaged in public matters, and
pleaded causes yourself, and were gaining reputation, who then
seemed your equal? And when would you have submitted to any man
examining and show that your opinions are bad? What, then, do you wish
me to say to you? "Help me in this matter." I have no theorem (rule)
for this. Nor have you, if you came to me for this purpose, come to me
as a philosopher, but as to a seller of vegetables or a shoemaker.
"For what purpose then have philosophers theorems?" For this
purpose, that whatever may happen, our ruling faculty may be and
continue to be conformable to nature. Does this seem to you a small
thing? "No; but the greatest." What then? does it need only a short
time? and is it possible to seize it as you pass by? If you can, seize
it.

  Then you will say, "I met with Epictetus as I should meet with a
stone or a statue": for you saw me, and nothing more. But he meets
with a man as a man, who learns his opinions, and in his turn shows
his own. Learn my opinions: show me yours; and then say that you
have visited me. Let us examine one another: if I have any bad
opinion, take it away; if you have any, show it. This is the meaning
of meeting with a philosopher. "Not so, but this is only a passing
visit, and while we are hiring the vessel, we can also see
Epictetus. Let us see what he says." Then you go away and say:
"Epictetus was nothing: he used solecisms and spoke in a barbarous
way." For of what else do you come as judges? "Well, but a man may say
to me, "If I attend to such matters, I shall have no land, as you have
none; I shall have no silver cups as you have none, nor fine beasts as
you have none." In answer to this it is perhaps sufficient to say: I
have no need of such things: but if you possess many things you have
need of others: whether you choose or not, you are poorer than I am.
"What then have I need of?" Of that which you have not: of firmness,
of a mind which is conformable to nature, of being free from
perturbation. Whether I have a patron or not, what is that to me?
but it is something to you. I am richer than you: I am not anxious
what Caesar will think of me: for this reason, I flatter no man.
This is what I possess instead of vessels of silver and gold. You have
utensils of gold; but your discourse, your opinions, your assents,
your movements, your desires are of earthen ware. But when I have
these things conformable to nature, why should I not employ my studies
also upon reason? for I have leisure: my mind is not distracted.
What shall I do, since I have no distraction? What more suitable to
a man have I than this? When you have nothing to do, you are
disturbed, you go to the theatre or you wander about without a
purpose. Why should not the philosopher labour to improve his
reason? You employ yourself about crystal vessels: I employ myself
about the syllogism named "The Living": you about myrrhine vessels;
I employ myself about the syllogism named "The Denying." To you
everything appears small that you possess: to me all that I have
appears great. Your desire is insatiable: mine is satisfied. To
(children) who put their hand into a narrow necked earthen vessel
and bring out figs and nuts, this happens; if they fill the hand, they
cannot take it out, and then they cry. Drop a few of them and you will
draw things out. And do you part with your desires: do not desire many
things and you will have what you want.

  CHAPTER 10

  In what manner we ought to bear sickness

  When the need of each opinion comes, we ought to have it in
readiness: on the occasion of breakfast, such as relate to
breakfast; in the bath, those that concern the bath; in bed, those
that concern bed.

     Let sleep not come upon thy languid eyes

     Before each daily action thou hast scann'd;

     What's done amiss, what done, what left undone;

     From first to last examine all, and then

     Blame what is wrong in what is right rejoice.

  And we ought to retain these verses in such way that we may use
them, not that we may utter them aloud, as when we exclaim "Paean
Apollo." Again in fever we should have ready such opinions as
concern a fever; and we ought not, as soon as the fever begins, to
lose and forget all. (A man who has a fever) may "If I philosophize
any longer, may I be hanged: wherever I go, I must take care of the
poor body, that a fever may not come." But what is philosophizing?
Is it not a preparation against events which may happen? Do you not
understand that you are saying something of this kind? "If I shall
still prepare myself to bear with patience what happens, may I be
hanged." But this is just as if a man after receiving blows should
give up the Pancratium. In the Pancratium it is in our power to desist
and not to receive blows. But in the other matter, we give up
philosophy, what shall we gain I gain? What then should a man say on
the occasion of each painful thing? "It was for this that I
exercised myself, for this I disciplined myself." God says to you,
"Give me a proof that you have duly practiced athletics, that you have
eaten what you ought, that you have been exercised, that you have
obeyed the aliptes." Then do you show yourself weak when the time
for action comes? Now is the time for the fever. Let it be borne well.
Now is the time for thirst, well; now is the time for hunger, bear
it well. Is it not in your power? who shall hinder you? The
physician will hinder you from drinking; but he cannot prevent you
from bearing thirst well: and he will hinder you from eating; but he
cannot prevent you from bearing hunger well.

  "But I cannot attend to my philosophical studies." And for what
purpose do you follow them? Slave, is it not that you may be happy,
that you may be constant, is it not that you may be in a state
conformable to nature and live so? What hinders you when you have a
fever from having your ruling faculty conformable to nature? Here is
the proof of the thing, here is the test of the philosopher. For
this also is a part of life, like walking, like sailing, like
journeying by land, so also is fever. Do you read when you are
walking? No. Nor do you when you have a fever. if you walk about well,
you have all that belongs to a man who walks. If you bear fever
well, you have all that belongs to a man in a fever. What is it to
bear a fever well? Not to blame God or man; not to be afflicted it
that which happens, to expect death well and nobly, to do what must be
done: when the physician comes in, not to be frightened at what he
says; nor if he says, "You are doing well," to be overjoyed. For
what good has he told you? and when you were in health, what good
was that to you? And even if he says, "You are in a bad way," do not
despond. For what is it to be ill? is it that you are near the
severance of the soul and the body? what harm is there in this? If you
are not near now, will you not afterward be near? Is the world going
to be turned upside down when you are dead? Why then do you flatter
the physician? Why do you say, "If you please, master, I shall be
well"? Why do you give him an opportunity of raising his eyebrows?
Do you not value a physician, as you do a shoemaker when he is
measuring your foot, or a carpenter when he is building your house,
and so treat the physician as to the body which is not yours, but by
nature dead? He who has a fever has an opportunity of doing this: if
he does these things, he has what belongs to him. For it is not the
business of a philosopher to look after these externals, neither his
wine nor his oil nor his poor body, but his own ruling power. But as
to externals how must he act? so far as not to be careless about them.
Where then is there reason for fear? where is there, then, still
reason for anger, and of fear about what belongs to others, about
things which are of no value? For we ought to have these two
principles in readiness: that except the will nothing is good nor bad;
and that we ought not to lead events, but to follow them. "My
brother ought not to have behaved thus to me." No; but he will see
to that: and, however he may behave, I will conduct myself toward
him as I ought. For this is my own business: that belongs to
another; no man can prevent this, the other thing can be hindered.

  CHAPTER 11

  Certain miscellaneous matters

  There are certain penalties fixed as by law for those who disobey
the divine administration. Whoever thinks any other thing to be good
except those things which depend on the will, let him envy, let him
desire, let him flatter, let him be perturbed: whoever considers
anything else to be evil, let him grieve, let him lament, let him
weep, let him be unhappy. And yet, though so severely punished, we
cannot desist.

  Remember what the poet says about the stranger:

     Stranger, I must not, e'en if a worse man come.

This, then, may be applied even to a father: "I must not, even if a
worse man than you should come, treat a father unworthily-, for all
are from paternal Zeus." And of a brother, "For all are from the
Zeus who presides over kindred." And so in the other relations of life
we shall find Zeus to be an inspector.

  CHAPTER 12

  About exercise

  We ought not to make our exercises consist in means contrary to
nature and adapted to cause admiration, for, if we do so, we, who call
ourselves philosophers, shall not differ at all from jugglers. For
it is difficult even to walk on a rope; and not only difficult, but it
is also dangerous. Ought we for this reason to practice walking on a
rope, or setting up a palm tree, or embracing statues? By no means.
Everything, which is difficult and dangerous is not suitable for
practice; but that is suitable which conduces to the working out of
that which is proposed to us as a thing to be worked out. To live with
desire and aversion, free from restraint. And what is this? Neither to
be disappointed in that which you desire, nor to fall into anything
which you would avoid. Toward this object, then, exercise ought to
tend. For, since it is not possible to have your desire not
disappointed and your aversion free from falling into that which you
would avoid, great and constant practice you must know that if you
allow your desire and aversion to turn to things which are not
within the power of the will, you will neither have your desire
capable of attaining your object, nor your aversion free from the
power of avoiding that which you would avoid. And since strong habit
leads, and we are accustomed to employ desire and aversion only to
things which are not within the power of our will, we ought to
oppose to this habit a contrary habit, and where there is great
slipperiness in the appearances, there to oppose the habit of
exercise.

  I am rather inclined to pleasure: I will incline to the contrary
side above measure for the sake of exercise. I am averse to pain: I
will rub and exercise against this the appearances which are presented
to me for the purpose of withdrawing my aversion from every such
thing. For who is a practitioner in exercise? He who practices not
using his desire, and applies his aversion only to things which are
within the power of his will, and practices most in the things which
are difficult to conquer. For this reason one man must practice
himself more against one thing and another against another thing.
What, then, is it to the purpose to set up a palm tree, or to carry
about a tent of skins, or a mortar and a pestle? Practice, man, if you
are irritable, to endure if you are abused, not to be vexed if you are
treated with dishonour. Then you will make so much progress that, even
if a man strikes you, you will say to yourself, "Imagine that you have
embraced a statue": then also exercise yourself to use wine properly
so as not to drink much, for in this also there are men who
foolishly practice themselves; but first of all you should abstain
from it, and abstain from a young girl and dainty cakes. Then at last,
if occasion presents itself, for the purpose of trying yourself at a
proper time, you will descend into the arena to know if appearances
overpower you as they did formerly. But at first fly far from that
which is stronger than yourself: the contest is unequal between a
charming young girl and a beginner in philosophy. "The earthen
pitcher," as the saying is, "and the rock do not agree."

  After the desire and the aversion comes the second topic of the
movements toward action and the withdrawals from it; that you may be
obedient to reason, that you do nothing out of season or place, or
contrary to any propriety of the kind. The third topic concerns the
assents, which is related to the things which are persuasive and
attractive. For as Socrates said, "we ought not to live a life without
examination," so we ought not to accept an appearance without
examination, but we should say, "Wait, let me see what you are and
whence you come"; like the watch at night, "Show me the pass." "Have
you the signal from nature which the appearance that may be accepted
ought to have?" And finally whatever means are applied to the body
by those who exercise it, if they tend in any way toward desire and
it, aversion, they also may be fit means of exercise; but if they
are for display, they are the indications of one who has turned
himself toward something external, and who is hunting for something
else, and who looks for spectators who will say, "Oh the great man."
For this reason, Apollonius said well, "When you intend to exercise
yourself for your own advantage, and you are thirsty from heat, take
in a mouthful of cold water, and spit it out, and tell nobody."

  CHAPTER 13

  What solitude is, and what kind of person a solitary man is

  Solitude is a certain condition of a helpless man. For because a man
is alone, he is not for that reason also solitary; just as though a
man is among numbers, he is not therefore not solitary. When then we
have lost either a brother, or a son, or a friend on whom we were
accustomed to repose, we say that we are left solitary, though we
are often in Rome, though such a crowd meet us, though so many live in
the same place, and sometimes we have a great number of slaves. For
the man who is solitary, as it is conceived, is considered to be a
helpless person and exposed to those who wish to harm him. For this
reason when we travel, then especially do we say that we are lonely
when we fall among robbers, for it is not the sight of a human
creature which removes us from solitude, but the sight of one who is
faithful and modest and helpful to us. For if being alone is enough to
make solitude, you may say that even Zeus is solitary in the
conflagration and bewails himself saying, "Unhappy that I am who
have neither Hera, nor Athena, nor Apollo, nor brother, nor son, nor
descendant nor kinsman." This is what some say that he does when he is
alone at the conflagration. For they do not understand how a man
passes his life when he is alone, because they set out from a
certain natural principle, from the natural desire of community and
mutual love and from the pleasure of conversation among men. But
none the less a man ought to be prepared in a manner for this also, to
be able to be sufficient for himself and to be his own companion.
For as Zeus dwells with himself, and is tranquil by himself, and
thinks of his own administration and of its nature, and is employed in
thoughts suitable to himself; so ought we also to be able to talk with
ourselves, not to feel the want of others also, not to be unprovided
with the means of passing our time; to observe the divine
administration and the relation of ourselves to everything else; to
consider how we formerly were affected toward things that happen and
how at present; what are still the things which give us pain; how
these also can be cured and how removed; if any things require
improvement, to improve them according to reason.

  For you see that Caesar appears to furnish us with great peace, that
there are no longer enemies nor battles nor great associations of
robbers nor of pirates, but we can travel at every hour and sail
from east to west. But can Caesar give us security from fever also,
can he from shipwreck, from fire, from earthquake or from lightning?
well, I will say, can he give us security against love? He cannot.
From sorrow? He cannot. From envy? He cannot. In a word then he cannot
protect us from any of these things. But the doctrine of
philosophers promises to give us security even against these things.
And what does it say? "Men, if you will attend to me, wherever you
are, whatever you are doing, you will not feel sorrow, nor anger,
nor compulsion, nor hindrance, but you will pass your time without
perturbations and free from everything." When a man has this peace,
not proclaimed by Caesar (for how should he be able to proclaim
it?), but by God through reason, is he not content when he is alone?
when he sees and reflects, "Now no evil can happen to me; for me there
is no robber, no earthquake, everything is full of peace, full of
tranquillity: every way, every city, every meeting, neighbor,
companion is harmless. One person whose business it is, supplies me
with food; another with raiment; another with perceptions, and
preconceptions. And if he does not supply what is necessary, He
gives the signal for retreat, opens the door, and says to you, 'Go.'
Go whither? To nothing terrible, but to the place from which you came,
to your friends and kinsmen, to the elements: what there was in you of
fire goes to fire; of earth, to earth; of air, to air; of water to
water: no Hades, nor Acheron, nor Cocytus, nor Pyriphlegethon, but all
is full of Gods and Demons." When a man has such things to think on,
and sees the sun, the moon and stars, and enjoys earth and sea, he
is not solitary nor even helpless. "Well then, if some man should come
upon me when I am alone and murder me?" Fool, not murder you, but your
poor body.

  What kind of solitude then remains? what want? why do we make
ourselves worse than children? and what do children do when they are
left alone? They take up shells and ashes, and they build something,
then pull it down, and build something else, and so they never want
the means of passing the time. Shall I, then, if you sail away, sit
down and weep, because I have been left alone and solitary? Shall I
then have no shells, no ashes? But children do what they do through
want of thought, and we through knowledge are unhappy.

  Every great power is dangerous to beginners. You must then bear such
things as you are able, but conformably to nature: but not... Practice
sometimes a way of living like a man in health. Abstain from food,
drink water, abstain sometimes altogether from desire, in order that
you may some time desire consistently with reason; and if consistently
with reason, when you have anything good in you, you will desire well.
"Not so; but we wish to live like wise men immediately and to be
useful to men." Useful how? what are you doing? have you been useful
to yourself? "But, I suppose, you wish to exhort them." You exhort
them! You wish to be useful to them. Show to them in your own
example what kind of men philosophy makes, and don't trifle. When
you are eating, do good to those who eat with you; when you are
drinking, to those who are drinking with you; by yielding to all,
giving way, bearing with them, thus do them good, and do not spit on
them your phlegm.

  CHAPTER 14

  Certain miscellaneous matters

  As bad tragic actors cannot sing alone, but in company with many: so
some persons cannot walk about alone. Man, if you are anything, both
walk alone and talk to yourself, and do not hide yourself in the
chorus. Examine a little at last, look around, stir yourself up,
that you may know who you are.

  When a man drinks water, or does anything for the sake of
practice, whenever there is an opportunity he tells it to all: "I
drink water." Is it for this that you drink water, for the purpose
of drinking water? Man, if it is good for you to drink, drink; but
if not, you are acting ridiculously. But if it is good for you and you
do drink, say nothing about it to those who are displeased with
water-drinkers. What then, do you wish to please these very men?

  Of things that are done some are done with a final purpose, some
according to occasion, others with a certain reference to
circumstances, others for the purpose of complying with others. and
some according to a fixed scheme of life.

  You must root out of men these two things, arrogance and distrust.
Arrogance, then, is the opinion that you want nothing: but distrust is
the opinion that you cannot be happy when so many circumstances
surround you. Arrogance is removed by confutation; and Socrates was
the first who practiced this. And, that the thing is not impossible,
inquire and seek. This search will do you no harm; and in a manner
this is philosophizing, to seek how it is possible to employ desire
and aversion without impediment.

  "I am superior to you, for my father is a man of consular rank."
Another says, "I have been a tribune, but you have not." If we were
horses, would you say, "My father was swifter?" "I have much barley
and fodder, or elegant neck ornaments." If, then, while you were
saying this, I said, "Be it so: let us run then." Well, is there
nothing in a man such as running in a horse, by which it will he known
which is superior and inferior? Is there not modesty, fidelity,
justice? Show yourself superior in these, that you may be superior
as a man. If you tell me that you can kick violently, I also will
say to you that you are proud of that which is the act of an ass.

  CHAPTER 15

  That we ought to proceed with circumspection to everything

  In every act consider what precedes and what follows, and then
proceed to the act. If you do not consider, you will at first begin
with spirit, since you have not thought at all of the things which
follow; but afterward, when some consequences have shown themselves,
you will basely desist. "I wish to conquer at the Olympic games." "And
I too, by the gods: for it is a fine thing." But consider here what
precedes and what follows; and then, if it is for your good, undertake
the thing. You must act according to rules, follow strict diet,
abstain from delicacies, exercise yourself by compulsion at fixed
times, in heat, in cold; drink no cold water, nor wine, when there
is opportunity of drinking it. In a word you must surrender yourself
to the trainer as you do to a physician. Next in the contest, you must
be covered with sand, sometimes dislocate a hand, sprain an ankle,
swallow a quantity of dust, be scourged with the whip; and after
undergoing all this, you must sometimes be conquered. After
reckoning all these things, if you have still an inclination, go to
the athletic practice. If you do not reckon them, observe you behave
like children who at one time you wi play as wrestlers, then as
gladiators, then blow a trumpet, then act a tragedy, when they have
seen and admired such things. So you also do: you are at one time a
wrestler, then a gladiator, then a philosopher, then a rhetorician;
but with your whole soul you are nothing: like the ape, you imitate
all that you see; and always one thing after another pleases you,
but that which becomes familiar displeases you. For you have never
undertaken anything after consideration, nor after having explored the
whole matter and put it to a strict examination; but you have
undertaken it at hazard and with a cold desire. Thus some persons
having seen a philosopher and having heard one speak like Euphrates-
yet who can speak like him?- wish to be philosophers themselves.

  Man, consider first what the matter is, then your own nature also,
what it is able to bear. If you are a wrestler, look at your
shoulders, your thighs, your loins: for different men are naturally
formed for different things. Do you think that, if you do, you can
be a philosopher? Do you think that you can eat as you do now, drink
as you do now, and in the same way be angry and out of humour? You
must watch, labour, conquer certain desires, you must depart from your
kinsmen, be despised by your slave, laughed at by those who meet
you, in everything you must be in an inferior condition, as to
magisterial office, in honours, in courts of justice. When you have
considered all these things completely, then, if you think proper,
approach to philosophy, if you would gain in exchange for these things
freedom from perturbations, liberty, tranquillity. If you have not
considered these things, do not approach philosophy: do not act like
children, at one time a philosopher, then a tax collector, then a
rhetorician, then a procurator of Caesar These things are not
consistent. You must be one man either good or bad: you must either
labour at your own ruling faculty or at external things: you must
either labour at things within or at external things: that is, you
must either occupy the place of a philosopher or that of one of the
vulgar.

  A person said to Rufus when Galba was murdered, "Is the world now
governed by Providence?" But Rufus replied, "Did I ever incidentally
form an argument from Galba that the world is governed by Providence?"

  CHAPTER 16

  That we ought with caution to enter, into familiar intercourse
with men

  If a man has frequent intercourse with others, either for talk, or
drinking together, or generally for social purposes, he must either
become like them, or change them to his own fashion. For if a man
places a piece of quenched charcoal close to a piece that is
burning, either the quenched charcoal will quench the other, or the
burning charcoal will light that which is quenched. Since, then, the
danger is so great, we must cautiously enter into such intimacies with
those of the common sort, and remember that it is impossible that a
man can keep company with one who is covered with soot without being
partaker of the soot himself. For what will you do if a man speaks
about gladiators, about horses, about athletes, or, what is worse,
about men? "Such a person is bad," "Such a person is good": "This
was well done," "This was done badly." Further, if he scoff, or
ridicule, or show an ill-natured disposition? Is any man among us
prepared like a lute-player when he takes a lute, so that as soon as
he has touched the strings, he discovers which are discordant, and
tunes the instrument? such a power as Socrates had who in all his
social intercourse could lead his companions to his own purpose? How
should you have this power? It is therefore a necessary consequence
that you are carried about by the common kind of people.

  Why, then, are they more powerful than you? Because they utter these
useless words from their real opinions: but you utter your elegant
words only from your lips; for this reason they are without strength
and dead, and it is nauseous to listen to your exhortations and your
miserable virtue, which is talked of everywhere. In this way the
vulgar have the advantage over you: for every opinion is strong and
invincible. Until, then, the good sentiments are fixed in you, and you
shall have acquired a certain power for your security, I advise you to
be careful in your association with like wax in the sun there will
be melted away whatever you inscribe on your minds in the school.
Withdraw, then, yourselves far from the sun so long as you have
these waxen sentiments. For this reason also philosophers advise men
to leave their native country, because ancient habits distract them
and do not allow a beginning to be made of a different habit; nor
can we tolerate those who meet us and say: "See such a one is now a
philosopher, who was once so-and-so." Thus also physicians send
those who have lingering diseases to a different country and a
different air; and they do right, Do you also introduce other habits
than those which you have: fix your opinions and exercise yourselves
in them. But you do not so: you go hence to a spectacle, to a show
of gladiators, to a place of exercise, to a circus; then you come back
hither, and again from this place you go to those places, and still
the same persons. And there is no pleasing habit, nor attention, nor
care about self and observation of this kind, "How shall I use the
appearances presented to me? according to nature, or contrary to
nature? how do I answer to them? as I ought, or as I ought not? Do I
say to those things which are independent of the will, that they do
not concern me?" For if you are not yet in this state, fly from your
former habits, fly from the common sort, if you intend ever to begin
to be something.

  CHAPTER 17

  On providence

  When you make any charge against Providence, consider, and you
will learn that the thing has happened according to reason. "Yes,
but the unjust man has the advantage." In what? "In money." Yes, for
he is superior to you in this, that he flatters, is free from shame,
and is watchful. What is the wonder? But see if he has the advantage
over you in being faithful, in being modest: for you will not find
it to be so; but wherein you are superior, there you will find that
you have the advantage. And I once said to a man who was vexed because
Philostorgus was fortunate: "Would you choose to lie with Sura?"
"May it never happen," he replied, "that this day should come?" "Why
then are you vexed, if he receives something in return for that
which he sells; or how can you consider him happy who acquires those
things by such means as you abominate; or what wrong does
Providence, if he gives the better things to the better men? Is it not
better to be modest than to be rich?" He admitted this. Why are you
vexed then, man, when you possess the better thing? Remember, then,
always, and have in readiness, the truth that this is a law of nature,
that the superior has an advantage over the inferior in that in
which he is superior; and you will never be vexed.

  "But my wife treats me badly." Well, if any man asks you what this
is, say, "My wife treats me badly." "Is there, then, nothing more?"
Nothing. "My father gives me nothing." But to say that this is an evil
is something which must be added to it externally, and falsely
added. For this reason we must not get rid of poverty, but of the
opinion about poverty, and then we shall be happy.

  CHAPTER 18

  That we ought not to be disturbed by any news

  When anything shall be reported to you which is of a nature to
disturb, have this principle in readiness, that the news is about
nothing which is within the power of your will. Can any man report
to you that you have formed a bad opinion, or had a bad desire? By
no means. But perhaps he will report that some person is dead. What
then is that to you? He may report that some person speaks ill of you.
What then is that to you? Or that your father is planning something or
other. Against whom? Against your will? How can he? But is it
against your poor body, against your little property? You are quite
safe: it is not against you. But the judge declares that you have
committed an act of impiety. And did not the judges make the same
declaration against Socrates ? Does it concern you that the judge
has made this declaration? No. Why then do you trouble yourself any
longer about it? Your father has a certain duty, and if he shall not
fulfill it, he loses the character of a father, of a man of natural
affection, of gentleness. Do not wish him to lose anything else on
this account. For never does a man do wrong, in one thing, and
suffer in another. On the other side it is your duty to make your
defense firmly, modestly, without anger: but if you do not, you also
lose the character of a son, of a man of modest behavior, of
generous character. Well then, is the judge free from danger? No;
but he also is in equal danger. Why then are you still afraid of his
decision? What have you to do with that which is another man's evil?
It is your own evil to make a bad defense: be on your guard against
this only. But to be condemned or not to be condemned, as that is
the act of another person, so it is the evil of another person. "A
certain person threatens you." Me? No. "He blames you." Let him see
how he manages his own affairs. "He is going to condemn you unjustly."
He is a wretched man.

  CHAPTER 19

  What is the condition of a common kind of man and of a philosopher

  The first difference between a common person and a philosopher is
this: the common person says, "Woe to me for my little child, for my
brother, for my father." The philosopher, if he shall ever be
compelled to say, "Woe to me," stops and says, "but for myself." For
nothing which is independent of the will can hinder or damage the
will, and the will can only hinder or damage itself. If, then, we
ourselves incline in this direction, so as, when we are unlucky, to
blame ourselves and to remember that nothing else is the cause of
perturbation or loss of tranquillity except our own opinion, I swear
to you by all the gods that we have made progress. But in the
present state of affairs we have gone another way from the
beginning. For example, while we were still children, the nurse, if we
ever stumbled through want of care, did not chide us, but would beat
the stone. But what did the stone do? Ought the stone to have moved on
account of your child's folly? Again, if we find nothing to eat on
coming out of the bath, the pedagogue never checks our appetite, but
he flogs the cook. Man, did we make you the pedagogue of the cook
and not of the child? Correct the child, improve him. In this way even
when we are grown up we are like children. For he who is unmusical
is a child in music; he who is without letters is a child in learning:
he who is untaught, is a child in life.

  CHAPTER 20

  That we can derive advantage from all external things

  In the case of appearances, which are objects of the vision,
nearly all have allowed the good and the evil to be in ourselves,
and not in externals. No one gives the name of good to the fact that
it is day, nor bad to the fact that it is night, nor the name of the
greatest evil to the opinion that three are four. But what do men say?
They say that knowledge is good, and that error is bad; so that even
in respect to falsehood itself there is a good result, the knowledge
that it is falsehood. So it ought to be in life also. "Is health a
good thing, and is sickness a bad thing" No, man. "But what is it?" To
be healthy, and healthy in a right way, is good: to be healthy in a
bad way is bad; so that it is possible to gain advantage even from
sickness, I declare. For is it not possible to gain advantage even
from death, and is it not possible to gain advantage from
mutilation? Do you think that Menoeceus gained little by death? "Could
a man who says so, gain so much as Menoeceus gained?" Come, man, did
he not maintain the character of being a lover of his country, a man
of great mind, faithful, generous? And if he had continued to live,
would he not have lost all these things? would he not have gained
the opposite? would he not have gained the name of coward, ignoble,
a hater of his country, a man who feared death? Well, do you think
that he gained little by dying? "I suppose not." But did the father of
Admetus gain much by prolonging his life so ignobly and miserably? Did
he not die afterward? Cease, I adjure you by the gods, to admire
things. Cease to make yourselves slaves, first of things, then on
account of things slaves of those who are able to give them or take
them away.

  "Can advantage then be derived from these things." From all; and
from him who abuses you. Wherein does the man who exercises before the
combat profit the athlete? Very greatly. This man becomes my exerciser
before the combat: he exercises me in endurance, in keeping my temper,
in mildness. You say no: but he, who lays hold of my neck and
disciplines my loins and shoulders, does me good; and the exercise
master does right when he says: "Raise him up with both hands, and the
heavier he is, so much the more is my advantage." But if a man
exercises me in keeping my, temper, does he not do good? This is not
knowing how to gain an advantage from men. "Is my neighbour bad?"
Bad to himself, but good to me: he exercises my good disposition, my
moderation. "Is my father bad?" Bad to himself, but to me good. This
is the rod of Hermes: "Touch with it what you please," as the saying
is. "and it will be of gold." I say not so: but bring what you please,
and I will make it good. Bring disease, bring death, bring poverty,
bring abuse, bring trial on capital charges: all these things
through the rod of Hermes shall be made profitable. "What will you
do with death?" Why, what else than that it shall do you honour, or
that it shall show you by act through it, what a man is who follows
the will of nature? "What will you do with disease?" I will show its
nature, I will be conspicuous in, it, I will be firm, I will be happy,
I will not flatter the physician, I will not wish to die. What else do
you seek? Whatever you shall give me, I will make it happy, fortunate,
honoured, a thing which a man shall seek.

  You say No: but take care that you do not fall sick: it is a bad
thing." This is the same as if you should say, "Take care that you
never receive the impression that three are four: that is bad." Man,
how is it bad? If I think about it as I ought, how shall it, then,
do me any damage? and shall it not even do me good? If, then, I
think about poverty as I ought to do, about disease, about not
having office, is not that enough for me? will it not be an advantage?
How, then, ought I any longer to look to seek evil and good in
externals? What happens these doctrines are maintained here, but no
man carries them away home; but immediately every one is at war with
his slave, with his neighbours, with those who have sneered at him,
with those who have ridiculed him. Good luck to Lesbius, who daily
proves that I know nothing.

  CHAPTER 21

  Against those who readily come to the profession of sophists

  They who have taken up bare theorems immediately wish to vomit
them forth, as persons whose stomach is diseased do with food. First
digest the thing, then do not vomit it up thus: f you do not digest
it, the thing become truly an emetic, a crude food and unfit to eat.
But after digestion show us some chance in your ruling faculty, as
athletes show in their shoulders by what they have been exercised
and what they have eaten; as those who have taken up certain arts show
by what they have learned. The carpenter does not come and say,
"Hear me talk about the carpenter's art"; but having undertaken to
build a house, he makes it, and proves that he knows the art. You also
ought to do something of the kind; eat like a man, drink like a man,
dress, marry, beget children, do the office of a citizen, endure
abuse, bear unreasonable brother, bear with your father, bear with
your son, neighbour, compassion. Show us these things that we may
see that you have in truth learned something from the philosophers.
You say, "No, but come and hear me read commentaries." Go away, and
seek somebody to vomit them on. "And indeed I will expound to you
the writings of Chrysippus as no other man can: I will explain his
text most clearly: I will add also, if I can, the vehemence of
Antipater and Archedemus."

  Is it, then, for this that young men shall leave their country and
their parents, that they may come to this place, and hear you
explain words? Ought they not to return with a capacity to endure,
to be active in association with others, free from passions, free from
perturbation, with such a provision for the journey of life with which
they shall be able to bear well the things that happen and derive
honour from them? And how can you give them any of these things
which you do not possess? Have you done from the beginning anything
else than employ yourself about the resolution of Syllogisms, of
sophistical arguments, and in those which work by questions? "But such
a man has a school; why should not I also have a school?" These things
are not done, man, in a careless way, nor just as it may happen; but
there must be a (fit) age and life and God as a guide. You say,
"No." But no man sails from a port without having sacrificed to the
Gods and invoked their help; nor do men sow without having called on
Demeter; and shall a man who has undertaken so great a work
undertake it safely without the Gods? and shall they who undertake
this work come to it with success? What else are you doing, man,
than divulging the mysteries? You say, "There is a temple at
Eleusis, and one here also. There is an Hierophant at Eleusis, and I
also will make an Hierophant: there is a herald, and I will
establish a herald; there is a torch-bearer at Eleusis, and I also
will establish a torch-bearer; there are torches at Eleusis, and I
will have torches here. The words are the same: how do the things done
here differ from those done there?" Most impious man, is there no
difference? these things are done both in due place and in due time;
and when accompanied with sacrifice and prayers, when a man is first
purified, and when he is disposed in his mind to the thought that he
is going to approach sacred rites and ancient rites. In this way the
mysteries are useful, in this way we come to the notion that all these
things were established by the ancients for the instruction and
correction of life. But you publish and divulge them out of time,
out of place, without sacrifices, without purity; you have not the
garments which the hierophant ought to have, nor the hair, nor the
head-dress, nor the voice, nor the age; nor have you purified yourself
as he has: but you have committed to memory the words only, and you
say: "Sacred are the words by themselves."

  You ought to approach these matters in another way; the thing is
great, it is mystical, not a common thing, nor is it given to every
man. But not even wisdom perhaps is enough to enable a man to take
care of youths: a man must have also a certain readiness and fitness
for this purpose, and a certain quality of body, and above all
things he must have God to advise him to occupy this office, as God
advised Socrates to occupy the place of one who confutes error,
Diogenes the office of royalty and reproof, and the office of teaching
precepts. But you open a doctor's shop, though you have nothing except
physic: but where and how they should be applied, you know not nor
have you taken any trouble about it. "See," that man says, "I too have
salves for the eyes." Have you also the power of using them? Do you
know both when and how they will do good, and to whom they will do
good? Why then do you act at hazard in things of the greatest
importance? why are you careless? why do you undertake a thing that is
in no way fit for you? Leave it to those who are able to do it, and to
do it well. Do not yourself bring disgrace on philosophy through
your own acts, and be not one of those who load it with a bad
reputation. But if theorems please you, sit still and turn them over
by yourself; but never say that you are a philosopher, nor allow
another to say it; but say: "He is mistaken, for neither are my
desires different from what they were before, nor is my activity
directed to other objects, nor do I assent to other things, nor in the
use of appearances have I altered at all from my former condition."
This you must think and say about yourself, if you would think as
you ought: if not, act at hazard, and do what you are doing; for it
becomes you.

  CHAPTER 22

  About cynicism

  When one of his pupils inquired of Epictetus, and he was a person
who appeared to be inclined to Cynism, what kind of person a Cynic
ought to be and what was the notion of the thing, We will inquire,
said Epictetus, at leisure: but I have so much to say to you that he
who without God attempts so great a matter, is hateful to God, and has
no other purpose than to act indecently in public. For in any
well-managed house no man comes forward, and says to himself, "I ought
to be manager of the house." If he does so, the master turns round
and, seeing him insolently giving orders, drags him forth and flogs
him. So it is also in this great city; for here also there is a master
of the house who orders everything. "You are the sun; you can by going
round make the year and seasons, and make the fruits grow and
nourish them, and stir the winds and make them remit, and warm the
bodies of men properly: go, travel round, and so administer things
from the greatest to the least." "You are a calf; when a lion shall
appear, do your proper business: if you do not, you will suffer." "You
are a bull: advance and fight, for this is your business, and
becomes you, and you can do it." "You can lead the army against
Illium; be Agamemnon." "You can fight in single combat against Hector:
be Achilles." But if Thersites came forward and claimed the command,
he would either not have obtained it; or, if he did obtain it, he
would have disgraced himself before many witnesses.

  Do you also think about the matter carefully: it is not what it
seems to you. "I wear a cloak now and I shall wear it then: I sleep
hard now, and I shall sleep hard then: I will take in addition a
little bag now and a staff, and I will go about and begin to beg and
to abuse those whom I meet; and if I see any man plucking the hair out
of his body, I will rebuke him, or if he has dressed his hair, or if
he walks about in purple." If you imagine the thing to be such as
this, keep far away from it: do not approach it: it is not at all
for you. But if you imagine it to be what it is, and do not think
yourself to be unfit for it, consider what a great thing you
undertake.

  In the first place in the things which relate to yourself, you
must not be in any respect like what you do now: you must not blame
God or man: you must take away desire altogether, you must transfer
avoidance only to the things which are within the power of the will:
you must not feel anger nor resentment nor envy nor pity; a girl
must not appear handsome to you, nor must you love a little
reputation, nor be pleased with a boy or a cake. For you ought to know
that the rest of men throw walls around them and houses and darkness
when they do any such things, and they have many means of concealment.
A man shuts the door, he sets somebody before the chamber: if a person
comes, say that he is out, he is not at leisure. But the Cynic instead
of all these things must use modesty as his protection: if he does
not, he will he indecent in his nakedness and under the open sky. This
is his house, his door: this is the slave before his bedchamber:
this is his darkness. For he ought not to wish to hide anything that
he does: and if he does, he is gone, he has lost the character of a
Cynic, of a man who lives under the open sky, of a free man: he has
begun to fear some external thing, he has begun to have need of
concealment, nor can he get concealment when he chooses. For where
shall he hide himself and how? And if by chance this public instructor
shall be detected, this pedagogue, what kind of things will he be
compelled to suffer? when then a man fears these things, is it
possible for him to be bold with his whole soul to superintend men? It
cannot be: it is impossible.

  In the first place, then, you must make your ruling faculty pure,
and this mode of life also. "Now, to me the matter to work on is my
understanding, as wood is to the carpenter, as hides to the shoemaker;
and my business is the right use of appearances. But the body is
nothing to me: the parts of it are nothing to me. Death? Let it come
when it chooses, either death of the whole or of a part. Fly, you say.
And whither; can any man eject me out of the world? He cannot. But
wherever I ever I go, there is the sun, there is the moon, there are
the stars, dreams, omens, and the conversation with Gods."

  Then, if he is thus prepared, the true Cynic cannot be satisfied
with this; but he must know that he is sent a messenger from Zeus to
men about good and bad things, to show them that they have wandered
and are seeking the substance of good and evil where it is not, but
where it is, they never think; and that he is a spy, as Diogenes was
carried off to Philip after the battle of Chaeroneia as a spy. For, in
fact, a Cynic is a spy of the things which are good for men and
which are evil, and it is his duty to examine carefully and to come
and report truly, and not to be struck with terror so as to point
out as enemies those who are not enemies, nor in any other way to be
perturbed by appearances nor confounded.

  It is his duty, then, to he able with a loud voice, if the
occasion should arise, and appearing on the tragic stage to say like
Socrates: "Men, whither are you hurrying, what are you doing,
wretches? like blind people you are wandering up and down: you are
going by another road, and have left the true road: you seek for
prosperity and happiness where they are not, and if another shows
you where they are, you do not believe him." Why do you seek it
without? In the body? It is not there. If you doubt, look at Myro,
look at Ophellius. In possessions? It is not there. But if you do
not believe me, look at Croesus: look at those who are now rich,
with what lamentations their life is filled. In power? It is not
there. If it is, those must be happy who have been twice and thrice
consuls; but they are not. Whom shall we believe in these matters? you
who from without see their affairs and are dazzled by an appearance,
or the men themselves? What do they say? Hear them when they groan,
when they grieve, when on account of these very consulships and
glory and splendour they think that they are more wretched and in
greater danger. Is it in royal power? It is not: if it were, Nero
would have been happy, and Sardanapalus. But neither was Agamemnon
happy, though he was a better man than Sardanapalus and Nero; but
while others are snoring what is he doing?

     "Much from his head he tore his rooted hair."

And what does he say himself?

     "I am perplexed," he says, "and

     Disturb'd I am," and "my heart out of my bosom

     Is leaping."

Wretch, which of your affairs goes badly? Your possessions? No. Your
body? No. But you are rich in gold and copper. What then is the matter
with you? That part of you, whatever it is, has been neglected by
you and is corrupted, the part with which we desire, with which we
avoid, with which we move toward and move from things. How
neglected? He knows not the nature of good for which he is made by
nature and the nature of evil; and what is his own, and what belongs
to another; and when anything that belongs to others goes badly, he
says, "Woe to me, for the Hellenes are in dancer." Wretched is his
ruling faculty, and alone neglected and uncared for. "The Hellenes are
going to die destroyed by the Trojans." And if the Trojans do not kill
them, will they not die? "Yes; but not all at once." What
difference, then, does it make? For if death is an evil, whether men
die altogether, or if they die singly, it is equally an evil. Is
anything else then going to happen than the separation of the soul and
the body? Nothing. And if the Hellenes perish, is the door closed, and
is it not in your power to die? "It is." Why then do you lament "Oh,
you who are a king and have the sceptre of Zeus?" An unhappy king does
not exist more than an unhappy god. What then art thou? In truth a
shepherd: for you weep as shepherds do, when a wolf has carried off
one of their sheep: and these who are governed by you are sheep. And
why did you come hither? Was your desire in any danger? was your
aversion? was your movement? was your avoidance of things? He replies,
"No; but the wife of my brother was carried off." Was it not then a
great gain to be deprived of an adulterous wife? "Shall we be
despised, then, by the Trojans?" What kind of people are the
Trojans, wise or foolish? If they are wise, why do you fight with
them? If they are fools, why do you care about them.

  In what, then, is the good, since it is not in these things? Tell
us, you who are lord, messenger and spy. Where you do not think that
it is, nor choose to seek it: for if you chose to seek it, you would
have found it to he in yourselves; nor would you be wandering out of
the way, nor seeking what belongs to others as if it were your own.
Turn your thoughts into yourselves: observe the preconceptions which
you have. What kind of a thing do you imagine the good to be? "That
which flows easily, that which is happy, that which is not impeded."
Come, and do you not naturally imagine it to be great, do you not
imagine it to be valuable? do you not imagine it to be free from harm?
In what material then ought you to seek for that which flows easily,
for that which is not impeded? in that which serves or in that which
is free? "In that which is free." Do you possess the body, then,
free or is it in servile condition? "We do not know." Do you not
know that it is the slave of fever, of gout, ophthalmia, dysentery, of
a tyrant, of fire, of iron, of everything which is stronger? Yes, it
is a slave." How, then, is it possible that anything which belongs
to the body can be free from hindrance? and how is a thing great or
valuable which is naturally dead, or earth, or mud? Well then, do
you possess nothing which is free? "Perhaps nothing." And who is
able to compel you to assent to that which appears false? "No man."
And who can compel you not to assent to that which appears true? "No
man." By this, then, you see that there is something in you
naturally free. But to desire or to be averse from, or to move
toward an object or to move from it, or to prepare yourself, or to
propose to do anything, which of you can do this, unless he has
received an impression of the appearance of that which is profitable
or a duty? "No man." You have, then, in these thongs also something
which is not hindered and is free. Wretched men, work out this, take
care of this, seek for good here.

  "And how is it possible that a man who has nothing, who is naked,
houseless, without a hearth, squalid, without a slave, without a city,
can pass a life that flows easily?" See, God has sent you a man to
show you that it is possible. "Look at me, who am without a city,
without a house, without possessions, without a slave; I sleep on
the ground; I have no wife, no children; no praetorium, but only the
earth and heavens, and one poor cloak. And what do I want? Am I not
without sorrow? am I not without fear? Am I not free? When did any
of you see me failing in the object of my desire? or ever falling into
that which I would avoid? did I ever blame God or man? did I ever
accuse any man? did any of you ever see me with sorrowful countenance?
And how do I meet with those whom you are afraid of and admire? Do not
I treat them like slaves? Who, when he sees me, does not think that he
sees his king and master?"

  This is the language of the Cynics, this their character, this is
their purpose. You say "No": but their characteristic is the little
wallet, and staff, and great jaws: the devouring of all that you
give them, or storing it up, or the abusing unseasonably all whom they
meet, or displaying their shoulder as a fine thing. Do you see how
you are going, to undertake so great a business? First take a
mirror: look at your shoulders; observe your loins, your thighs. You
are going, my man, to be enrolled as a combatant in the Olympic games,
no frigid and miserable contest. In the Olympic games a man is not
permitted to be conquered only and to take his departure; but first he
must be disgraced in the sight of all the world, not in the sight of
Athenians only, or of Lacedaemonians or of Nicopolitans; next he
must be whipped also if he has entered into the contests rashly: and
before being whipped, he must suffer thirst and heat, and swallow much
dust.

  Reflect more carefully, know thyself, consult the divinity,
without God attempt nothing; for if he shall advise you, be assured
that he intends you to become great or to receive many blows. For this
very amusing quality is conjoined to a Cynic: he must be flogged
like an ass, and when he is flogged, he must love those who flog
him, as if he were the father of all, and the brother of all. You
say "No"; but if a man flogs you, stand in the public place and call
out, "Caesar, what do I suffer in this state of peace under thy
protection? Let us bring the offender before the proconsul." But
what is Caesar to a Cynic, or what is a proconsul, or what is any
other except him who sent the Cynic down hither, and whom he serves,
namely Zeus? Does he call upon any other than Zeus? Is he not
convinced that, whatever he suffers, it is Zeus who is exercising him?
Hercules when he was exercised by Eurystheus did not think that he was
wretched, but without hesitation he attempted to execute all that he
had in hand. And is he who is trained to the contest and exercised
by Zeus going to call out and to be vexed, he who is worthy to bear
the sceptre of Diogenes? Hear what Diogenes says to the passers-by
when he is in a fever, "Miserable wretches, will you not stay? but are
you going so long a journey to Olympia to see the destruction or the
fight of athletes; and will you not choose to see the combat between a
fever and a man?" Would such a man accuse God who sent him down as
if God were treating him unworthily, a man who gloried in his
circumstances, and claimed to be an example to those who were
passing by? For what shall he accuse him of? because he maintains a
decency of behavior, because he displays his virtue more
conspicuously? Well, and what does he say of poverty, about death,
about pain? How did he compare his own happiness with that of the
Great King? or rather he thought that there was no comparison
between them. For where there are perturbations, and griefs, and
fears, and desires not satisfied, and aversions of things which you
cannot avoid, and envies and jealousies, how is there a road to
happiness there? But where there are corrupt principles, there these
things must of necessity be.

  When the young man asked, if when a Cynic is sick, and a friend asks
him to come to his house and be taken care of in his sickness, shall
the Cynic accept the invitation, he replied: And where shall you find,
I ask, a Cynic's friend? For the man who invites ought to be such
another as the that he may be worthy of being reckoned the Cynic's
friend. He ought to be a partner in the Cynic's sceptre and his
royalty, and a worthy minister, if he intends to be considered
worthy of a Cynic's friendship, as Diogenes was a friend of
Antisthenes, as Crates was a friend of Diogenes. Do you think that, if
a man comes to a Cynic and salutes him, he is the Cynic's friend,
and that the Cynic will think him worthy of receiving a Cynic into his
house? So that, if you please, reflect on this also: rather look round
for some convenient dunghill on which you shall bear your fever and
which will shelter you from the north wind that you may not be
chilled. But you seem to me to wish to go into some man's house and to
be well fed there for a time. Why then do you think of attempting so
great a thing?

  "But," said the young man, "shall marriage and the procreation of
children as a chief duty be undertaken by the Cynic?" If you grant
me a community of wise men, Epictetus replies, perhaps no man will
readily apply himself to the Cynic practice. For on whose account
should he undertake this manner of life? However if we suppose that he
does, nothing will prevent him from marrying and begetting children;
for his wife will be another like himself, and his father-in-law
another like himself, and his children will be brought up like
himself. But in the present state of things which is like that of an
army placed in battle order, is it not fit that the Cynic should
without any distraction be employed only on the administration of God,
able to go about among men, not tied down to the common duties of
mankind, nor entangled in the ordinary relations of life, which if
he neglects, he will not maintain the character of an honourable and
good man? and if he observes them he will lose the character of the
messenger, and spy and herald of God. For consider that it is his duty
to do something toward his father-in-law, something to the other
kinsfolk of his wife, something to his wife also. He is also
excluded by being a Cynic from looking after the sickness of his own
family, and from providing for their support. And, to say nothing of
the rest, he must have a vessel for heating water for the child that
he may wash it in the bath; wool for his wife when she is delivered of
a child, oil, a bed, a cup: so the furniture of the house is
increased. I say nothing of his other occupations and of his
distraction. Where, then, now is that king, he who devotes himself
to the public interests,

     The people's guardian and so full of cares.

whose duty it is to look after others, the married and those who
have children; to see who uses his wife well, who uses her badly;
who quarrels; what family is well administered, what is not; going
about as a physician does and feels pulses? He says to one, "You
have a fever," to another, "You have a headache, or the gout": he says
to one, "Abstain from food"; to another he says, "Eat"; or "Do not use
the bath"; to another, "You require the knife, or the cautery." How
can he have time for this who is tied to the duties of common life? is
it not his duty to supply clothing to his children, and to send them
to the schoolmaster with writing tablets, and styles. Besides, must he
not supply them with beds? for they cannot be genuine Cynics as soon
as they are born. If he does not do this, it would be better to expose
the children as soon as they are born than to kill them in this way.
Consider what we are bringing the Cynic down to, how we are taking his
royalty from him. "Yes, but Crates took a wife." You are speaking of a
circumstance which arose from love and of a woman who was another
Crates. But we are inquiring about ordinary marriages and those
which are free from distractions, and making this inquiry we do not
find the affair of marriage in this state of the world a thing which
is especially suited to the Cynic.

  "How, then, shall a man maintain the existence of society?" In the
name of God, are those men greater benefactors to society who
introduce into the world to occupy their own places two or three
grunting children, or those who superintend as far as they can all
mankind, and see what they do, how they live, what they attend to,
what they neglect contrary to their duty? Did they who left little
children to the Thebans do them more good than Epaminondas who died
childless? And did Priamus, who begat fifty worthless sons, or
Danaus or AEolus contribute more to the community than Homer? then
shall the duty of a general or the business of a writer exclude a
man from marriage or the begetting of children, and such a man shall
not be judged to have accepted the condition of childlessness for
nothing; and shall not the royalty of a Cynic be considered an
equivalent for the want of children? Do we not perceive his grandeur
and do we not justly contemplate the character of Diogenes; and do we,
instead of this, turn our eyes to the present Cynics, who are dogs
that wait at tables and in no respect imitate the Cynics of old except
perchance in breaking wind, but in nothing else? For such matters
would not have moved us at all nor should we have wondered if a
Cynic should not marry or beget children. Man, the Cynic is the father
of all men; the men are his sons, the women are his daughters: he so
carefully visits all, so well does he care for all. Do you think
that it is from idle impertinence that he rebukes those whom he meets?
He does it as a father, as a brother, and as the minister of the
father of all, the minister of Zeus.

  If you please, ask me also if a Cynic shall engage in the
administration of the state. Fool, do you seek a greater form of
administration than that in which he is engaged? Do you ask if he
shall appear among the Athenians and say something about the
revenues and the supplies, he who must talk with all men, alike with
Athenians, alike with Corinthians, alike with Romans, not about
supplies, nor yet about revenues, nor about peace or war, but about
happiness and unhappiness, about good fortune and bad fortune, about
slavery and freedom? When a man has undertaken the administration of
such a state, do you ask me if he shall engage in the administration
of a state? ask me also if he shall govern: again I will say to you:
Fool, what greater government shall he exercise than that which he
exercises now?

  It is necessary also for such a man to have a certain habit of body:
for if he appears to be consumptive, thin and pale, his testimony
has not then the same weight. For he must not only by showing the
qualities of the soul prove to the vulgar that it is in his power
independent of the things which they admire to be a good man, but he
must also show by his body that his simple and frugal way of living in
the open air does not injure even the body. "See," he says, "I am a
proof of this, and my own body also is." So Diogenes used to do, for
he used to go about fresh-looking, and he attracted the notice of
the many by his personal appearance. But if a Cynic is an object of
compassion, he seems to a beggar: all persons turn away from him,
all are offended with him; for neither ought he to appear dirty so
that he shall not also in this respect drive away men; but his very
roughness ought to be clean and attractive.

  There ought also to belong to the Cynic much natural grace and
sharpness; and if this is not so, he is a stupid fellow, and nothing
else; and he must have these qualities that he may be able readily and
fitly to be a match for all circumstances that may happen. So Diogenes
replied to one who said, "Are you the Diogenes who does not believe
that there are gods?" "And, how," replied Diogenes, "can this be
when I think that you are odious to the gods?" On another occasion
in reply to Alexander, who stood by him when he was sleeping, and
quoted Homer's line,

     A man a councilor should not sleep all night,

he answered, when he was half-asleep,

     The people's guardian and so full of cares.

  But before all the Cynic's ruling faculty must be purer than the
sun; and, if it is not, he must be a cunning knave and a fellow of
no principle, since while he himself is entangled in some vice he will
reprove others. For see how the matter stands: to these kings and
tyrants their guards and arms give the power of reproving some
persons, and of being able even to punish those who do wrong though
they are themselves bad; but to a Cynic instead of arms and guards
it is conscience which gives this power. When he knows that be has
watched and labored for mankind, and has slept pure, and sleep has
left him still purer, and that he thought whatever he has thought as a
friend of the gods, as a minister, as a participator of the power of
Zeus, and that on all occasions he is ready to say

     Lead me, O Zeus, and thou O Destiny;

and also, "If so it pleases the gods, so let it be"; why should he not
have confidence to speak freely to his own brothers, to his
children, in a word to his kinsmen? For this reason he is neither
overcurious nor a busybody when he is in this state of mind: for he is
not a meddler with the affairs of others when he is superintending
human affairs, but he is looking after his own affairs. If that is not
so, you may also say that the general is a busybody, when he
inspects his soldiers, and examines them, and watches them, and
punishes the disorderly. But if, while you have a cake under your arm,
you rebuke others, I will say to you: "Will you not rather go away
into a corner and eat that which you have stolen"; what have you to do
with the affairs of others? For who are you? are you the bull of the
herd, or the queen of the bees? Show me the tokens of your
supremacy, such as they have from nature. But if you are a drone
claiming the sovereignty over the bees, do you not suppose that your
fellow citizens will put you down as the bees do the drones?

  The Cynic also ought to have such power of endurance as to seem
insensible to the common sort and a stone: no man reviles him, no
man strikes him, no man insults him, but he gives his body that any
man who chooses may do with it what he likes. For he bears in mind
that the inferior must be overpowered by the superior in that in which
it is inferior; and the body is inferior to the many, the weaker to
the stronger. He never then descends into such a contest in which he
can be overpowered; but he immediately withdraws from things which
belong to others, he claims not the things which are servile. where
there is will and the use of appearances, there you will see how
many eyes he has so that you may say, "Argus was blind compared with
him." Is his assent ever hasty, his movement rash, does his desire
ever fall in its object, does that which he would avoid befall him, is
his purpose unaccomplished, does he ever find fault, is he ever
humiliated, is he ever envious? To these he directs all his
attention and energy; but as to everything else he snores supine.
All is peace; there is no robber who takes away his will, no tyrant.
But what say you as to his body? I say there is. And as to
magistracies and honours? What does he care for them? When then any
person would frighten him through them, he says to him, "Begone,
look for children: masks are formidable to them; but I know that
they are made of shell, and they have nothing inside."

  About such a matter as this you are deliberating. Therefore, if
you please, I urge you in God's name, defer the matter, and first
consider your preparation for it. For see what Hector says to
Andromache, "Retire rather," he says, "into the house and weave:

     War is the work of men

     Of all indeed, but specially 'tis mine.

So he was conscious of his own qualification, and knew her weakness.

  CHAPTER 23

  To those who read and discuss for the sake of ostentation

  First say to yourself, who you wish to be: then do accordingly
what you are doing; for in nearly all other things we see this to be
so. Those who follow athletic exercises first determine what they wish
to be, then do accordingly what follows. If a man is a runner in the
long course, there is a certain kind of diet, of walking, rubbing
and exercise: if a man is a runner in the stadium, all these things
are different; if he is a Pentathlete, they are still more
different. So you will find it also in the arts. If you are a
carpenter, you will have such and such things: if a worker in metal,
such things. For everything that we do, if we refer it to no end, we
shall do it to no purpose; and if we refer it to the wrong end, we
shall miss the mark. Further, there is a general end or purpose, and a
particular purpose. First of all, we must act as a man. What is
comprehended in this? We must not be like a sheep, though gentle,
nor mischievous, like a wild beast. But the particular cud has
reference to each person's mode of life and his will. The
lute-player acts as a lute-player, the carpenter as a carpenter, the
philosopher as a philosopher, the rhetorician as a rhetorician. When
then you say, "Come and hear me read to you": take care first of all
that you are not doing this without a purpose; then, if you have
discovered that you are doing this with reference to a purpose,
consider if it is the right purpose. Do you wish to do good or to be
praised? Immediately you hear him saying, "To me what is the value
of praise from the many?" and he says well, for it is of no value to a
musician, so far as he is a musician, nor to a geometrician. Do you
then wish to be useful? in what? tell us that we may run to your
audience-room. Now can a man do anything useful to others, who has not
received something useful himself? No, for neither can a man do
anything useful in the carpenter's art, unless he is a carpenter;
nor in the shoemaker's art, unless he is a shoemaker.

  Do you wish to know then if you have received any advantage? Produce
your opinions, philosopher. What is the thing which desire promises?
Not to fall in the object. What does aversion promise? Not to fall
into that which you would avoid. Well; do we fulfill their promise?
Tell me the truth; but if you lie, I will tell you. Lately when your
hearers came together rather coldly, and did not give you applause,
you went away humbled. Lately again when you had been praised, you
went about and said to all, "What did you think of me?" "Wonderful,
master, I swear by all that is dear to me." "But how did I treat of
that particular matter?" "Which?" "The passage in which I described
Pan and the nymphs?" "Excellently." Then do you tell me that in desire
and in aversion you are acting according to nature? Begone; try to
persuade somebody else. Did you not praise a certain person contrary
to your opinion? and did you not flatter a certain person who was
the son of a senator? Would you wish your own children to be such
persons? "I hope not." Why then did you praise and flatter him? "He is
an ingenuous youth and listens well to discourses." How is this? "He
admires me." You have stated your proof. Then what do you think? do
not these very people secretly despise you? When, then, a man who is
conscious that he has neither done any good nor ever thinks of it,
finds a philosopher who says, "You have a great natural talent, and
you have a candid and good disposition," what else do you think that
he says except this, "This man has some need of me?" Or tell me what
act that indicates a, great mind has he shown? Observe; he has been in
your company a long time; he has listened to your discourses, he has
heard you reading; has he become more modest? has he been turned to
reflect on himself? has he perceived in what a bad state he is? has he
cast away self-conceit? does he look for a person to teach him? "He
does." A man who will teach him to live? No, fool, but how to talk;
for it is for this that he admires you also. Listen and hear what he
says: "This man writes with perfect art, much better than Dion."
This is altogether another thing. Does he say, "This man is modest,
faithful, free from perturbations?" and even if he did say it, I
should say to him, "Since this man is faithful, tell me what this
faithful man is." And if he could not tell me, I should add this,
"First understand what you say, then speak."

  You, then, who are in a wretched plight and gaping after applause
and counting your auditors, do you intend to be useful to others?
"To-day many more attended my discourse." "Yes, many; we suppose
five hundred." "That is nothing; suppose that there were a
thousand." "Dion never had so many hearers." "How could he?" "And they
understand what is said beautifully." "What is fine, master, can
move even a stone." See, these are the words of a philosopher. This is
the disposition of a man who will do good to others; here is a man who
has listened to discourses, who has read what is written about
Socrates as Socratic, not as the compositions of Lysias and Isocrates.
"I have often wondered by what arguments." Not so, but "by what
argument": this is more exact than that. What, have you read the words
at all in a different way from that in which you read little odes? For
if you read them as you ought, you would not have been attending to
such matters, but you would rather have been looking to these words:
"Anytus and Meletus are able to kill me, but they cannot harm me": and
"I am always of such a disposition as to pay regard to nothing of my
own except to the reason which on inquiry seems to me the best." Hence
who ever heard Socrates say, "I know something and I teach"; but he
used to send different people to different teachers. Therefore they
used to come to him and ask to be introduced to philosophy by him; and
he would take them and recommend them. Not so; but as he accompanied
them he would say, "Hear me to-day discoursing in the house of
Quadratus." Why should I hear you? Do you wish to show me that you put
words together cleverly? You put them together, man; and what good
will it do you? "But only praise me." What do you mean by praising?
"Say to me, "Admirable, wonderful." Well, I say so. But if that is
praise whatever it is which philosophers mean by the name of good,
what have I to praise in you? If it is good to speak well, teach me,
and will praise you. "What then? ought a man to listen to such
things without pleasure?" I hope not. For my part I do not listen even
to a lute-player without pleasure. Must I then for this reason stand
and play the lute? Hear what Socrates says, "Nor would it be seemly
for a man of my age, like a young man composing addresses, to appear
before you." "Like a young man," he says. For in truth this small
art is an elegant thing, to select words, and to put them together,
and to come forward and gracefully to read them or to speak, and while
he is reading to say, "There are not many who can do these things, I
swear by all that you value."

  Does a philosopher invite people to hear him? As the sun himself
draws men to him, or as food does, does not the philosopher also
draw to him those who will receive benefit? What physician invites a
man to be treated by him? Indeed I now hear that even the physicians
in Rome do invite patients, but when I lived there, the physicians
were invited. "I invite you to come and hear that things are in a
bad way for you, and that you are taking care of everything except
that of which you ought to take care, and that you are ignorant of the
good and the bad and are unfortunate and unhappy." A fine kind of
invitation: and yet if the words of the philosopher do not produce
this effect on you, he is dead, and so is the speaker. Rufus was
used to say: "If you have leisure to praise me, I am speaking to no
purpose." Accordingly he used to speak in such a way that every one of
us who were sitting there supposed that some one had accused him
before Rufus: he so touched on what was doing, he so placed before the
eyes every man's faults.

  The philosopher's school, ye men, is a surgery: you ought not to
go out of it with pleasure, but with pain. For you are not in sound
health when you enter: one has dislocated his shoulder, another has an
abscess, a third a fistula, and a fourth a headache. Then do I sit and
utter to you little thoughts and exclamations that you may praise me
and go away, one with his shoulder in the same condition in which he
entered, another with his head still aching, and a third with his
fistula or his abscess just as they were? Is it for this then that
young men shall quit home, and leave their parents and their friends
and kinsmen and property, that they may say to you, "Wonderful!"
when you are uttering your exclamations. Did Socrates do this, or
Zeno, or Cleanthes?

  What then? is there not the hortatory style? Who denies it? as there
is the style of refutation, and the didactic style. Who, then, ever
reckoned a fourth style with these, the style of display? What is
the hortatory style? To be able to show both to one person and to many
the struggle in which they are engaged, and that they think more about
anything than about what they really wish. For they wish the things
which lead to happiness, but they look for them in the wrong place. In
order that this may be done, a thousand seats must be placed and men
must be invited to listen, and you must ascend the pulpit in a fine
robe or cloak and describe the death of Achilles. Cease, I entreat you
by the gods, to spoil good words and good acts as much as you can.
Nothing can have more power in exhortation than when the speaker shows
to the hearers that he has need of them. But tell me who when he hears
you reading or discoursing is anxious about himself or turns to
reflect on himself? or when he has gone out says, "The philosopher hit
me well: I must no longer do these things." But does he not, even if
you have a great reputation, say to some person, "He spoke finely
about Xerxes"; and another says, "No, but about the battle of
Thermopylae"? Is this listening to a philosopher?

  CHAPTER 24

  That we ought not to be moved by a desire of those things which
are not in our power

  Let not that which in another is contrary to nature be an evil to
you: for you are not formed by nature to be depressed with others
nor to be unhappy with others, but to be happy with them. If a man
is unhappy, remember that his unhappiness is his own fault: for God
has made all men to be happy, to be free from perturbations. For
this purpose he has given means to them, some things to each person as
his own, and other things not as his own: some things subject to
hindrance and compulsion and deprivation; and these things are not a
man's own: but the things which are not subject to hindrances are
his own; and the nature of good and evil, as it was fit to be done
by him who takes care of us and protects us like a father, he has made
our own. "But," you say, "I have parted from a certain person, and he
is grieved." Why did he consider as his own that which belongs to
another? why, when he looked on you and was rejoiced, did he not
also reckon that you are mortal, that it is natural for you to part
from him for a foreign country? Therefore he suffers the
consequences of his own folly. But why do you or for what purpose
bewail yourself? Is it that you also have not thought of these things?
but like poor women who are good for nothing, you have enjoyed all
things in which you took pleasure, as if you would always enjoy
them, both places and men and conversation; and now you sit and weep
because you do not see the same persons and do not live in the same
places. Indeed you deserve this, to be more wretched than crows and
ravens who have the power of flying where they please and changing
their nests for others, and crossing the seas without lamenting or
regretting their former condition. "Yes, but this happens to them
because they are irrational creatures." Was reason, then, given to
us by the gods for the purpose of unhappiness and misery, that we
may pass our lives in wretchedness and lamentation? Must all persons
be immortal and must no man go abroad, and must we ourselves not go
abroad, but remain rooted like plants; and, if any of our familiar
friends go abroad, must we sit and weep; and, on the contrary, when he
returns, must we dance and clap our hands like children?

  Shall we not now wean ourselves and remember what we have heard from
the philosophers? if we did not listen to them as if they were
jugglers: they tell us that this world is one city, and the
substance out of which it has been formed is one, and that there
must be a certain period, and that some things must give way to
others, that some must be dissolved, and others come in their place;
some to remain in the same place, and others to be moved; and that all
things are full of friendship, first of the gods, and then of men
who by nature are made to be of one family; and some must be with
one another, and others must be separated, rejoicing in those who
are with them, and not grieving for those who are removed from them;
and man in addition to being by nature of a noble temper and having
a contempt of all things which are not in the power of his will,
also possesses this property, not to be rooted nor to be naturally
fixed to the earth, but to go at different times to different
places, sometimes from the urgency of certain occasions, and at others
merely for the sake of seeing. So it was with Ulysses, who saw

     Of many men the states, and learned their ways.

And still earlier it was the fortune of Hercules to visit all the
inhabited world

     Seeing men's lawless deeds and their good rules of law:

casting out and clearing away their lawlessness and introducing in
their place good rules of law. And yet how many friends do you think
that he had in Thebes, how many in Argos, how many in Athens? and
how many do you think that he gained by going about? And he married
also, when it seemed to him a proper occasion, and begot children, and
left them without lamenting or regretting or leaving them as
orphans; for he knew that no man is an orphan; but it is the father
who takes care of all men always and continuously. For it was not as
mere report that he had heard that Zeus is the father of for he
thought that Zeus was his own father, and he called him so, and to him
he looked when he was doing what he did. Therefore he was enabled to
live happily in all places. And it is never possible for happiness and
desire of what is not present to come together. that which is happy
must have all that desires, must resemble a person who is filled
with food, and must have neither thirst nor hunger. "But Ulysses
felt a desire for his wife and wept as he sat on a rock." Do you
attend to Homer and his stories in everything? Or if Ulysses really
wept, what was he else than an unhappy man? and what good man is
unhappy? In truth, the whole is badly administered, if Zeus does not
take care of his own citizens that they may be happy like himself. But
these things are not lawful nor right to think of: and if Ulysses
did weep and lament, he was not a good man. For who is good if he
knows not who he is? and who knows what he is, if he forgets that
things which have been made are perishable, and that it is not
possible for one human being to be with another always? To desire,
then, things which are impossible is to have a slavish character and
is foolish: it is the part of a stranger, of a man who fights
against God in the only way that he can, by his opinions.

  "But my mother laments when she does not see me." Why has she not
learned these principles? and I do not say this, that we should not
take care that she may not lament, but I say that we ought not to
desire in every way what is not our own. And the sorrow of another
is another's sorrow: but my sorrow is my own. I, then, will stop my
own sorrow by every means, for it is in my power: and the sorrow of
another I will endeavor to stop as far as I can; but I will not
attempt to do it by every means; for if I do, I shall be fighting
against God, I shall be opposing and shall be placing myself against
him in the administration of the universe; and the reward of this
fighting against God and of this disobedience not only will the
children of my children pay, but I also shall myself, both by day
and by night, startled by dreams, perturbed, trembling at every
piece of news, and having my tranquillity depending on the letters
of others. Some person has arrived from Rome. "I only hope that
there is no harm." But what harm can happen to you, where you are not?
From Hellas some one is come: "I hope that there is no harm." In
this way every place may be the cause of misfortune to you. Is it
not enough for you to be unfortunate there where you are, and must you
be so even beyond sea, and by the report of letters? Is this the way
in which your affairs are in a state of security? "Well, then, suppose
that my friends have died in the places which are far from me." What
else have they suffered than that which is the condition of mortals?
Or how are you desirous at the same time to live to old age, and at
the same time not to see the death of any person whom you love? Know
you not that in the course of a long time many and various kinds of
things must happen; that a fever shall overpower one, a robber
another, and a third a tyrant? Such is the condition of things
around us, such are those who live with us in the world: cold and
heat, and unsuitable ways of living, and journeys by land, and voyages
by sea, and winds, and various circumstances which surround us,
destroy one man, and banish another, and throw one upon an embassy and
another into an army. Sit down, then, in a flutter at all these
things, lamenting, unhappy, unfortunate, dependent on another, and
dependent not on one or two, but on ten thousands upon ten thousands.

  Did you hear this when you were with the philosophers? did you learn
this? do you not know that human life is a warfare? that one man
must keep watch, another must go out as a spy, and a third must fight?
and it is not possible that all should be in one place, nor is it
better that it be so. But you, neglecting neglecting to do the
commands of the general, complain when anything more hard than usual
is imposed on you, and you do not observe what you make the army
become as far as it is in your power; that if all imitate you, no
man will dig a trench, no man will put a rampart round, nor keep
watch, nor expose himself to danger, but will appear to be useless for
the purposes of an army. Again, in a vessel if you go as a sailor,
keep to one place and stick to it. And if you are ordered to climb the
mast, refuse; if to run to the head of the ship, refuse; and what
master, of a ship will endure you? and will he not pitch you overboard
as a useless thing, an impediment only and bad example to the other
sailors? And so it is here also: every man's life is a kind of
warfare, and it is long and diversified. You must observe the duty
of a soldier and do everything at the nod of the general; if it is
possible, divining what his wishes are: for there is no resemblance
between that general and this, neither in strength nor in
superiority of character. You are placed in a great office of
command and not in any mean place; but you are always a senator. Do
you not know that such a man must give little time to the affairs of
his household, but be often away from home, either as a governor or
one who is governed, or discharging some office, or serving in war
or acting as a judge? Then do you tell me that you wish, as a plant,
to be fixed to the same places and to be rooted? "Yes, for it is
pleasant." Who says that it is not? but a soup is pleasant, and a
handsome woman is pleasant. What else do those say who make pleasure
their end? Do you not see of what men yon have uttered the language?
that it is the language of Epicureans and catamites? Next while you
are doing what they do and holding their opinions, do you speak to
us the words of Zeno and of Socrates? Will you not throw away as far
as you can the things belonging to others with which you decorate
yourself, though they do not fit you at all? For what else do they
desire than to sleep without hindrance and free from compulsion, and
when they have risen to yawn at their leisure, and to wash the face,
then write and read what they choose, and then talk about some
trifling matter being praised by their friends whatever they may
say, then to go forth for a walk, and having walked about a little
to bathe, and then eat and sleep, such sleep as is the fashion of such
men? why need we say how? for one can easily conjecture. Come, do
you also tell your own way of passing the time which you desire, you
who are an admirer of truth and of Socrates and Diogenes. What do
you wish to do in Athens? the same, or something else? Why then do you
call yourself a Stoic? Well, but they who falsely call themselves
Roman citizens, are severely punished; and should those, who falsely
claim so great and reverend a thing and name, get off unpunished? or
is this not possible, but the law divine and strong and inevitable
is this, which exacts the severest punishments from those who commit
the greatest crimes? For what does this law say? "Let him who pretends
to things which do not belong to him be a boaster, a vainglorious man:
let him who disobeys the divine administration be base, and a slave;
let him suffer grief, let him be envious, let him pity; and in a
word let him be unhappy and lament."

  "Well then; do you wish me to pay court to a certain person? to go
to his doors?" If reason requires this to be done for the sake of
country, for the sake of kinsmen, for the sake of mankind, why
should you not go? You are not ashamed to go to the doors of a
shoemaker, when you are in want of shoes, nor to the door of a
gardener, when you want lettuces; and are you ashamed to go to the
doors of the rich when you want anything? "Yes, for I have no awe of a
shoemaker." Don't feel any awe of the rich. "Nor will I flatter the
gardener." And do not flatter the rich. "How, then, shall I get what I
want?" Do I say to you, "Go as if you were certain to get what you
want"? And do not I only tell you that you may do what is becoming
to yourself? "Why, then, should I still go?" That you may have gone,
that you may have discharged the duty of a citizen, of a brother, of a
friend. And further remember that you have gone to the shoemaker, to
the seller of vegetables, who have no power in anything great or
noble, though he may sell dear. You go to buy lettuces: they cost an
obolus, but not a talent. So it is here also. The matter is worth
going for to the rich man's door. Well, I will go. It is worth talking
about. Let it be so; I will talk with him. But you must also kiss
his hand and flatter him with praise. Away with that, it is a talent's
worth: it is not profitable to me, nor to the state nor to my friends,
to have done that which spoils a good citizen and a friend. "But you
seem not to have been eager about the matter, if you do not
succeed." Have you again forgotten why you went? Know you not that a
good man does nothing for the sake of appearance, but for the sake
of doing right? "What advantage is it, then, to him to have done
right?" And what advantage is it to a man who writes the name of
Dion to write it as he ought? The advantage is to have written it. "Is
there no reward then?" Do you seek a reward for a good man greater
than doing what is good and just? At Olympia you wish for nothing
more, but it seems to you enough to be crowned at the games. Does it
seem to you so small and worthless a thing to be good and happy? For
these purposes being introduced by the gods into this city, and it
being now your duty to undertake the work of a man, do you still
want nurses also and a mamma, and do foolish women by their weeping
move you and make you effeminate? Will you thus never cease to be a
foolish child? know you not that he who does the acts of a child,
the older he is, the more ridiculous he is?

  In Athens did you see no one by going to his house? "I visited any
man that I pleased." Here also be ready to see, and you will see
whom you please: only let it be without meanness, neither with
desire nor with aversion, and your affairs will be well managed. But
this result does not depend on going nor on standing at the doors, but
it depends on what is within, on your opinions. When you have
learned not to value things which are external, and not dependent on
the will, and to consider that not one of them is your own, but that
these things only are your own, to exercise the judgment well, to form
opinions, to move toward an object, to desire, to turn from a thing,
where is there any longer room for flattery, where for meanness? why
do you still long for the quiet there, and for the places to which you
are accustomed? Wait a little and you will again find these places
familiar: then, if you are of so ignoble a nature, again if you
leave these also, weep and lament.

  "How then shall I become of an affectionate temper?" By being of a
noble disposition, and happy. For it is not reasonable to be
means-spirited nor to lament yourself, nor to depend on another, nor
even to blame God or man. I entreat you, become an affectionate person
in this way, by observing these rules. But if through this
affection, as you name it, you are going to be a slave and wretched,
there is no profit in being affectionate. And what prevents you from
loving another as a person subject to mortality, as one who may go
away from you. Did not Socrates love his own children? He did; but
it was as a free man, as one who remembered that he must first be a
friend to the gods. For this reason he violated nothing which was
becoming to a good man, neither in making his defense nor by fixing
a penalty on himself, nor even in the former part of his life when
he was a senator or when be was a soldier. But we are fully supplied
with every pretext for being of ignoble temper, some for the sake of a
child, some for a mother, and others for brethren's sake. But it is
not fit for us to be unhappy on account of any person, but to be happy
on account of all, but chiefly on account of God who has made us for
this end. Well, did Diogenes love nobody, who was so kind and so
much a lover of all that for mankind in general he willingly undertook
so much labour and bodily sufferings? He did love mankind, but how? As
became a minister of God, at the same time caring for men, and being
also subject to God. For this reason all the earth was his country,
and no particular place; and when he was taken prisoner he did not
regret Athens nor his associates and friends there, but even he became
familiar with the pirates and tried to improve them; and being sold
afterward he lived in Corinth as before at Athens; and he would have
behaved the same, if he had gone to the country of the Perrhaebi. Thus
is freedom acquired. For this reason he used to say, "Ever since
Antisthenes made me free, I have not been a slave." How did
Antisthenes make him free? Hear what he says: "Antisthenes taught me
what is my own, and what is not my own; possessions are not my own,
nor kinsmen, domestics, friends, nor reputation, nor places
familiar, nor mode of life; all these belong to others." What then
is your own? "The use of appearances. This be showed to me, that I
possess it free from hindrance, and from compulsion, no person can put
an obstacle in my way, no person can force me to use appearances
otherwise than I wish." Who then has any power over me? Philip or
Alexander, or Perdiccas or the Great King? How have they this power?
For if a man is going to be overpowered by a man, he must long
before be overpowered by things. If, then, pleasure is not able to
subdue a man, nor pain, nor fame, nor wealth, but he is able, when
he chooses, to spit out all his poor body in a man's face and depart
from life, whose slave can he still be? But if he dwelt with
pleasure in Athens, and was overpowered by this manner of life, his
affairs would have been at every man's command; the stronger would
have had the power of grieving him. How do you think that Diogenes
would have flattered the pirates that they might sell him to some
Athenian, that some time he might see that beautiful Piraeus, and
the Long Walls and the Acropolis? In what condition would you see
them? As a captive, a slave and mean: and what would be the use of
it for you? "Not so: but I should see them as a free man." Show me,
how you would be free. Observe, some person has caught you, who
leads you away from your accustomed place of abode and says, "You
are my slave, for it is in my power to hinder you from living as you
please, it is in my power to treat you gently, and to humble you: when
I choose, on the contrary you are cheerful and go elated to Athens."
What do you say to him who treats you as a slave? What means have
you of finding one who will rescue you from slavery? Or cannot you
even look him in the face, but without saying more do you entreat to
be set free? Man, you ought to go gladly to prison, hastening, going
before those who lead you there. Then, I ask you, are you unwilling to
live in Rome and desire to live in Hellas? And when you must die, will
you then also fill us with your lamentations, because you will not see
Athens nor walk about in the Lyceion? Have you gone abroad for this?
was it for this reason you have sought to find some person from whom
you might receive benefit? What benefit? That you may solve syllogisms
more readily, or handle hypothetical arguments? and for this reason
did you leave brother, country, friends, your family, that you might
return when you had learned these things? So you did not go abroad
to obtain constancy of mind, nor freedom from perturbation, nor in
order that, being secure from harm, you may never complain of any
person, accuse no person, and no man may wrong you, and thus you may
maintain your relative position without impediment? This is a fine
traffic that you have gone abroad for in syllogisms and sophistical
arguments and hypothetical: if you like, take your place in the
agora and proclaim them for sale like dealers in physic. Will you
not deny even all that you have learned that you may not bring a bad
name on your theorems as useless? What harm has philosophy done you?
Wherein has Chrysippus injured you that you should prove by your
acts that his labours are useless? Were the evils that you had there
not enough, those which were the cause of your pain and lamentation,
even if you had not gone abroad? Have you added more to the list?
And if you again have other acquaintances and friends, you will have
more causes for lamentation; and the same also if you take an
affection for another country. Why, then, do you live to surround
yourself with other sorrows upon sorrows through which you are
unhappy? Then, I ask you, do you call this affection? What
affection, man! If it is a good thing, it is the cause of no evil:
if it is bad, I have nothing to do with it. I am formed by nature
for my own good: I am not formed for my own evil.

  What then is the discipline for this purpose? First of all the
highest and the principal, and that which stands as it were at the
entrance, is this; when you are delighted with anything, be
delighted as with a thing which is not one of those which cannot be
taken away, but as with something of such a kind, as an earthen pot
is, or a glass cup, that, when it has been broken, you may remember
what it was and may not be troubled. So in this matter also: if you
kiss your own child, or your brother or friend, never give full
license to the appearance, and allow not your pleasure to go as far as
it chooses; but check it, and curb it as those who stand behind men in
their triumphs and remind them that they are mortal. Do you also
remind yourself in like manner, that he whom you love is mortal, and
that what you love is nothing of your own: it has been given to you
for the present, not that it should not be taken from you, nor has
it been given to you for all time, but as a fig is given to you or a
bunch of grapes at the appointed season of the year. But if you wish
for these things in winter, you are a fool. So if you wish for your
son or friend when it is not allowed to you, you must know that you
are wishing for a fig in winter. For such as winter is to a fig,
such is every event which happens from the universe to the things
which are taken away according to its nature. And further, at the
times when you are delighted with a thing, place before yourself the
contrary appearances. What harm is it while you are kissing your child
to say with a lisping voice, "To-morrow you will die"; and to a friend
also, "To-morrow you will go away or I shall, and never shall we see
one another again"? "But these are words of bad omen." And some
incantations also are of bad omen; but because they are useful, I
don't care for this; only let them be useful. "But do you call
things to be of bad omen except those which are significant of some
evil?" Cowardice is a word of bad omen, and meanness of spirit, and
sorrow, and grief and shamelessness. These words are of bad omen:
and yet we ought not to hesitate to utter them in order to protect
ourselves against the things. Do you tell me that a name which is
significant of any natural thing is of evil omen? say that even for
the ears of corn to be reaped is of bad omen, for it signifies the
destruction of the ears, but not of the world. Say that the falling of
the leaves also is of bad omen, and for the dried fig to take the
place of the green fig, and for raisins to be made from the grapes.
For all these things are changes from a former state into other
states; not a destruction, but a certain fixed economy and
administration. Such is going away from home and a small change:
such is death, a greater change, not from the state which now is to
that which is not, but to that which is not now. "Shall I then no
longer exist?" You will not exist, but you be something else, of which
the world now has need: for you also came into existence not when
you chose, but when the world had need of you.

  Wherefore the wise and good man, remembering who he is and whence he
came, and by whom he was produced, is attentive only to this, how he
may fill his place with due regularity and obediently to God. "Dost
Thou still wish me to exist? I will continue to exist as free, as
noble in nature, as Thou hast wished me to exist: for Thou hast made
me free from hindrance in that which is my own. But hast Thou no
further need of me? I thank Thee; and so far I have remained for Thy
sake, and for the sake of no other person, and now in obedience to
Thee I depart." "How dost thou depart?" Again, I say, as Thou hast
pleased, as free, as Thy servant, as one who has known Thy commands
and Thy prohibitions. And so long as I shall stay in Thy service, whom
dost Thou will me to be? A prince or a private man, a senator or a
common person, a soldier or a general, a teacher or a master of a
family? whatever place and position Thou mayest assign to me, as
Socrates says, "I will die ten thousand times rather than desert
them." And where dost Thou will me to be? in Rome or Athens, or Thebes
or Gyara. Only remember me there where I am. If Thou sendest me to a
place where there are no means for men living according to nature, I
shall not depart in disobedience to Thee, but as if Thou wast giving
me the signal to retreat: I do not leave Thee, let this be to from
my intention, but perceive that Thou hast no need of me. If means of
living according to nature be allowed me, I will seek no other place
than that in which I am, or other men than those among whom I am.

  Let these thoughts be ready to hand by night and by day: these you
should write, these you should read: about these you should talk to
yourself, and to others. Ask a man, "Can you help me at all for this
purpose?" and further, go to another and to another. Then if
anything that is said he contrary to your wish, this reflection
first will immediately relieve you, that it is not unexpected. For
it is a great thing in all cases to say, "I knew that I begot a son
who is mortal." For so you also will say, "I knew that I am mortal,
I knew that I may leave my home, I knew that I may be ejected from it,
I knew that I may be led to prison." Then if you turn round, and
look to yourself, and seek the place from which comes that which has
happened, you will forthwith recollect that it comes from the place of
things which are out of the power of the will, and of things which are
not my own. "What then is it to me?" Then, you will ask, and this is
the chief thing: "And who is it that sent it?" The leader, or the
general, the state, the law of the state. Give it me then, for I
must always obey the law in everything. Then, when the appearance
pains you, for it is not in your power to prevent this, contend
against it by the aid of reason, conquer it: do not allow it to gain
strength nor to lead you to the consequences by raising images such as
it pleases and as it pleases. If you be in Gyara, do not imagine the
mode of living at Rome, and how many pleasures there were for him
who lived there and how many there would be for him who returned to
Rome: but fix your mind on this matter, how a man who lives in Gyara
ought to live in Gyara like a man of courage. And if you be in Rome,
do not imagine what the life in Athens is, but think only of the
life in Rome.

  Then in the place of all other delights substitute this, that of
being conscious that you are obeying God, that, not in word but in
deed, you are performing the acts of a wise and good man. For what a
thing it is for a man to be able to say to himself, "Now, whatever the
rest may say in solemn manner in the schools and may be judged to be
saying in a way contrary to common opinion, this I am doing; and
they are sitting and are discoursing of my virtues and inquiring about
me and praising me; and of this Zeus has willed that I shall receive
from myself a demonstration, and shall myself know if He has a soldier
such as He ought to have, a citizen such as He ought to have, and if
He has chosen to produce me to the rest of mankind as a witness of the
things which are independent of the will: 'See that you fear without
reason, that you foolishly desire what you do desire: seek not the
good in things external; seek it in yourselves: if you do not, you
will not find it.' For this purpose He leads me at one time hither, at
another time sends me thither, shows me to men as poor, without
authority, and sick; sends me to Gyara, leads me into prison, not
because He hates me, far from him be such a meaning, for who hates the
best of his servants? nor yet because He cares not for me, for He does
not neglect any even of the smallest things;' but He does this for the
purpose of exercising me and making use of me as a witness to
others. Being appointed to such a service, do I still care about the
place in which I am, or with whom I am, or what men say about me?
and do I not entirely direct my thoughts to God and to His
instructions and commands?"

  Having these things always in hand, and exercising them by yourself,
and keeping them in readiness, you will never be in want of one to
comfort you and strengthen you. For it is not shameful to be without
something to eat, but not to have reason sufficient for keeping away
fear and sorrow. But if once you have gained exemption from sorrow and
fear, will there any longer be a tyrant for you, or a tyrant's
guard, or attendants on Caesar? Or shall any appointment to offices at
court cause you pain, or shall those who sacrifice in the Capitol,
on the occasion of being named to certain functions, cause pain to you
who have received so great authority from Zeus? Only do not make a
proud display of it, nor boast of it; but show it by your acts; and if
no man perceives it, be satisfied that you are yourself in a healthy
state and happy.

  CHAPTER 25

  To those who fall off from their purpose

  Consider as to the things which you proposed to yourself at first,
which you have secured and which you have not; and how you are pleased
when you recall to memory the one and are pained about the other;
and if it is possible, recover the things wherein you failed. For we
must not shrink when we are engaged in the greatest combat, but we
must even take blows. For the combat before us is not in wrestling and
the Pancration, in which both the successful and the unsuccessful
may have the greatest merit, or may have little, and in truth may be
very fortunate or very unfortunate; but the combat is for good fortune
and happiness themselves. Well then, even if we have renounced the
contest in this matter, no man hinders us from renewing the combat
again, and we are not compelled to wait for another four years that
the games at Olympia may come again; but as soon as you have recovered
and restored yourself, and employ the same zeal, you may renew the
combat again; and if again you renounce it, you may again renew it;
and if you once gain the victory, you are like him who has never
renounced the combat. Only do not, through a habit of doing the same
thing, begin to do it with pleasure, and then like a bad athlete go
about after being conquered in all the circuit of the games like
quails who have run away.

  "The sight of a beautiful young girl overpowers me. Well, have I not
been overpowered before? An inclination arises in me to find fault
with a person; for have I not found fault with him before?" You
speak to us as if you had come off free from harm, just as if a man
should say to his physician who forbids him to bathe, "Have I not
bathed before?" If, then, the physician can say to him, "Well, and
what, then, happened to you after the bath? Had you not a fever, had
you not a headache?" And when you found fault with a person lately,
did you not do the act of a malignant person, of a trifling babbler;
did you not cherish this habit in you by adding to it the
corresponding acts? And when you were overpowered by the young girl,
did you come off unharmed? Why, then, do you talk of what you did
before? You ought, I think, remembering what you did, as slaves
remember the blows which they have received, to abstain from the
same faults. But the one case is not like the other; for in the case
of slaves the pain causes the remembrance: but in the case of your
faults, what is the pain, what is the punishment; for when have you
been accustomed to fly from evil acts? Sufferings, then, of the trying
character are useful to us, whether we choose or not.

  CHAPTER 26

  To those who fear want

  Are you not ashamed at more cowardly and more mean than fugitive
slaves? How do they when they run away leave their masters? on what
estates do they depend, and what domestics do they rely on? Do they
not, after stealing a little which is enough for the first days,
then afterward move on through land or through sea, contriving one
method after another for maintaining their lives? And what fugitive
slave ever died of hunger? But you are afraid lest necessary things
should fall you, and are sleepless by night. Wretch, are you so blind,
and don't you see the road to which the want of necessaries leads?
"Well, where does it lead?" To the same place to which a fever
leads, or a stone that falls on you, to death. Have you not often said
this yourself to your companions? have you not read much of this kind,
and written much? and how often have you boasted that you were easy as
to death?

  "Yes: but my wife and children also suffer hunger." Well then,
does their hunger lead to any other place? Is there not the same
descent to some place for them also? Is not there the same state below
for them? Do you not choose, then, to look to that place full of
boldness against every want and deficiency, to that place to which
both the richest and those who have held the highest offices, and
kings themselves and tyrants must descend? or to which you will
descend hungry, if it should so happen, but they burst by
indigestion and drunkenness. What beggar did you hardly ever see who
was not an old man, and even of extreme old age? But chilled with cold
day and night, and lying on the ground, and eating only what is
absolutely necessary they approach near to the impossibility of dying.
Cannot you write? Cannot you teach children? Cannot you be a
watchman at another person's door? "But it is shameful to come to such
necessity." Learn, then, first what are the things which are shameful,
and then tell us that you are a philosopher: but at present do not,
even if any other man call you so, allow it.

  Is that shameful to you which is not your own act, that of which you
are not the cause, that which has come to you by accident, as a
headache, as a fever? If your parents were poor, and left their
property to others, and if while they live, they do not help you at
all, is this shameful to you? Is this what you learned with the
philosophers? Did you never hear that the thing which is shameful
ought to be blamed, and that which is blamable is worthy of blame?
Whom do you blame for an act which is not his own, which he did not do
himself? Did you, then, make your father such as he is, or is it in
your power to improve him? Is this power given to you? Well then,
ought you to wish the things which are not given to you, or to be
ashamed if you do not obtain them? And have you also been accustomed
while you were studying philosophy to look to others and to hope for
nothing from yourself? Lament then and groan and eat with fear that
you may not have food to-morrow. Tremble about your poor slaves lest
they steal, lest they run away, lest they die. So live, and continue
to live, you who in name only have approached philosophy and have
disgraced its theorems as far as you can by showing them to be useless
and unprofitable to those who take them up; you who have never
sought constancy, freedom from perturbation, and from passions: you
who have not sought any person for the sake of this object, but many
for the sake of syllogisms; you who have never thoroughly examined any
of these appearances by yourself, "Am I able to bear, or am I not able
to bear? What remains for me to do?" But as if all your affairs were
well and secure, you have been resting on the third topic, that of
things being unchanged, in order that you may possess unchanged- what?
cowardice, mean spirit, the admiration of the rich, desire without
attaining any end, and avoidance which fails in the attempt? About
security in these things you have been anxious.

  Ought you not to have gained something in addition from reason
and, then, to have protected this with security? And whom did you ever
see building a battlement all round and not encircling it with a wall?
And what doorkeeper is placed with no door to watch? But you
practice in order to be able to prove- what? You practice that you may
not be tossed as on the sea through sophisms, and tossed about from
what? Show me first what you hold, what you measure, or what you
weigh; and show me the scales or the medimnus; or how long will you go
on measuring the dust? Ought you not to demonstrate those things which
make men happy, which make things go on for them in the way as they
wish, and why we ought to blame no man, accuse no man, and acquiesce
in the administration of the universe? Show me these. "See, I show
them: I will resolve syllogisms for you." This is the measure,
slave; but it is not the thing measured. Therefore you are now
paying the penalty for what you neglected, philosophy: you tremble,
you lie awake, you advise with all persons; and if your
deliberations are not likely to please all, you think that you have
deliberated ill. Then you fear hunger, as you suppose: but it is not
hunger that you fear, but you are afraid that you will not have a
cook, that you will not have another to purchase provisions for the
table, a third to take off your shoes, a fourth to dress you, others
to rub you, and to follow you, in order that in the bath, when you
have taken off your clothes and stretched yourself out like those
who are crucified you may be rubied on this side and on that, and then
the aliptes may say, "Change his position, present the side, take hold
of his head, show the shoulder"; and then when you have left the
bath and gone home, you may call out, "Does no one bring something
to eat?" And then, "Take away the tables, sponge them": you are afraid
of this, that you may not be able to lead the life of a sick man.
But learn the life of those who are in health, how slaves live, how
labourers, how those live who are genuine philosophers; how Socrates
lived, who had a wife and children; how Diogenes lived, and how
Cleanthes, who attended to the school and drew water. If you choose to
have these things, you will have them everywhere, and you will live in
full confidence. Confiding in what? In that alone in which a man can
confide, in that which is secure, in that which is not subject to
hindrance, in that which cannot be taken away, that is, in your own
will. And why have you made yourself so useless and good for nothing
that no man will choose to receive you into his house, no man to
take care of you? but if a utensil entire and useful were cast abroad,
every man who found it would take it up and think it a gain; but no
man will take you up, and every man will consider you a loss. So
cannot you discharge the office of a dog, or of a cock? Why then do
you choose to live any longer, when you are what you are?

  Does any good man fear that he shall fall to have food? To the blind
it does not fall, to the lame it does not: shall it fall to a good
man? And to a good soldier there does not fail to one who gives him
pay, nor to a labourer, nor to a shoemaker: and to the good man
shall there be wanting such a person? Does God thus neglect the things
that He has established, His ministers, His witnesses, whom alone He
employs as examples to the uninstructed, both that He exists, and
administers well the whole, and does not neglect human affairs, and
that to a good man there is no evil either when he is living or when
he is dead? What, then, when He does not supply him with food? What
else does He do than like a good general He has given me the signal to
retreat? I obey, I follow, assenting to the words of the Commander,
praising, His acts: for I came when it pleased Him, and I will also go
away when it pleases Him; and while I lived, it was my duty to
praise God both by myself, and to each person severally and to many.
He does not supply me with many things, nor with abundance, He does
not will me to live luxuriously; for neither did He supply Hercules
who was his own son; but another was king of Argos and Mycenae, and
Hercules obeyed orders, and laboured, and was exercised. And
Eurystheus was what he was, neither kin, of Argos nor of Mycenae,
for he was not even king of himself; but Hercules was ruler and leader
of the whole earth and sea, who purged away lawlessness, and
introduced justice and holiness; and he did these things both naked
and alone. And when Ulysses was cast out shipwrecked, did want
humiliate him, did it break his spirit? but how did he go off to the
virgins to ask for necessaries, to beg which is considered most
shameful?

     As a lion bred in the mountains trusting in his strength.

  Relying on what? Not on reputation nor on wealth nor on the power of
a magistrate, but on his own strength, that is, on his opinions
about the things which are in our power and those which, are not.
For these are the only things which make men free, which make them
escape from hindrance, which raise the head of those who are
depressed, which make them look with steady eyes on the rich and on
tyrants. And this was the gift given to the philosopher. But you
will not come forth bold, but trembling about your trifling garments
and silver vessels. Unhappy man, have you thus wasted your time till
now?

  "What, then, if I shall be sick?" You will be sick in such a way
as you ought to be. "Who will take care of me?" God; your friends.
"I shall lie down on a hard bed." But you will lie down like a man. "I
shall not have a convenient chamber." You will be sick in an
inconvenient chamber. "Who will provide for me the necessary food?"
Those who provide for others also. You will be sick like Manes. "And
what, also, will be the end of the sickness? Any other than death?" Do
you then consider that this the chief of all evils to man and the
chief mark of mean spirit and of cowardice is not death, but rather
the fear of death? Against this fear then I advise you to exercise
yourself: to this let all your reasoning tend, your exercises, and
reading; and you will know that thus only are men made free.
DISCOURSES

                                   BOOK FOUR

  CHAPTER 1

  About freedom

  He is free who lives as he wishes to live; who is neither subject to
compulsion nor to hindrance, nor to force; whose movements to action
are not impeded, whose desires attain their purpose, and who does
not fall into that which he would avoid. Who, then, chooses to live in
error? No man. Who chooses to live deceived, liable to mistake,
unjust, unrestrained, discontented, mean? No man. Not one then of
the bad lives as he wishes; nor is he, then, free. And who chooses
to live in sorrow, fear, envy, pity, desiring and failing in his
desires, attempting to avoid something and falling into it? Not one.
Do we then find any of the bad free from sorrow, free from fear, who
does not fall into that which he would avoid, and does not obtain that
which he wishes? Not one; nor then do we find any bad man free.

  If, then, a man who has been twice consul should hear this, if you
add, "But you are a wise man; this is nothing to you": he will
pardon you. But if you tell him the truth, and say, "You differ not at
all from those who have been thrice sold as to being yourself not a
slave," what else ought you to expect than blows? For he says,
"What, I a slave, I whose father was free, whose mother was free, I
whom no man can purchase: I am also of senatorial rank, and a friend
of Caesar, and I have been a consul, and I own many slaves." In the
first place, most excellent senatorial man, perhaps your father also
was a slave in the same kind of servitude, and your mother, and your
grandfather and all your ancestors in an ascending series. But even if
they were as free as it is possible, what is this to you? What if they
were of a noble nature, and you of a mean nature; if they were
fearless, and you a coward; if they had the power of self-restraint,
and you are not able to exercise it.

  "And what," you may say, "has this to do with being a slave?" Does
it seem to you to be nothing to do a thing unwillingly, with
compulsion, with groans, has this nothing to do with being a slave?
"It is something," you say: "but who is able to compel me, except
the lord of all, Caesar?" Then even you yourself have admitted that
you have one master. But that he is the common master of all, as you
say, let not this console you at all: but know that you are a slave in
a great family. So also the people of Nicopolis are used to exclaim,
"By the fortune of Caesar, are free."

  However, if you please, let us not speak of Caesar at present. But
tell me this: did you never love any person, a young girl, or slave,
or free? What then is this with respect to being a slave or free? Were
you never commanded by the person beloved to do something which you
did not wish to do? have you never flattered your little slave? have
you never kissed her feet? And yet if any man compelled you to kiss
Caesar's feet, you would think it an insult and excessive tyranny.
What else, then, is slavery? Did you never go out by night to some
place whither you did not wish to go, did you not expend what you
did not wish to expend, did you not utter words with sighs and groans,
did you not submit to abuse and to be excluded? But if you are ashamed
to confess your own acts, see what Thrasonides says and does, who
having seen so much military service as perhaps not even you have,
first of all went out by night, when Geta does not venture out, but if
he were compelled by his master, would have cried out much and would
have gone out lamenting his bitter slavery. Next, what does
Thrasonides say? "A worthless girl has enslaved me, me whom no
enemy, ever did." Unhappy man, who are the slave even of a girl, and a
worthless girl. Why then do you still call yourself free? and why do
you talk of your service in the army? Then he calls for a sword and is
angry with him who out of kindness refuses it; and he sends presents
to her who hates him, and entreats and weeps, and on the other hand,
having had a little success, he is elated. But even then how? was he
free enough neither to desire nor to fear?

  Now consider in the case of animals, how we employ the notion of
liberty. Men keep tame lions shut up, and feed them, and some take
them about; and who will say that this lion is free? Is it not the
fact that the more he lives at his ease, so much the more he is in a
slavish condition? and who if he had perception and reason would
wish to be one of these lions? Well, these birds when they are
caught and are kept shut up, how much do they suffer in their attempts
to escape? and some of them die of hunger rather than submit to such a
kind of life. And as many of them as live, hardly live and with
suffering pine away; and if they ever find any opening, they make
their escape. So much do they desire their natural liberty, and to
be independent and free from hindrance. And what harm is there to
you in this? "What do you say? I am formed by nature to fly where I
choose, to live in the open air, to sing when I choose: you deprive me
of all this, and say, 'What harm is it to you?' For this reason we
shall say that those animals only are free which cannot endure
capture, but, as soon as they are caught, escape from captivity by
death. So Diogenes says that there is one way to freedom, and that
is to die content: and he writes to the Persian king, "You cannot
enslave the Athenian state any more than you can enslave fishes." "How
is that? cannot I catch them?" "If you catch them," says Diogenes,
"they will immediately leave you, as fishes do; for if you catch a
fish, it dies; and if these men that are caught shall die, of what use
to you is the preparation for war?" These are the words of a free
man who had carefully examined the thing and, as was natural, had
discovered it. But if you look for it in a different place from
where it is, what wonder if you never find it?

  The slave wishes to be set free immediately. Why? Do you think
that he wishes to pay money to the collectors of twentieths? No; but
because he imagines that hitherto through not having obtained this, he
is hindered and unfortunate. "If I shall be set free, immediately it
is all happiness, I care for no man, I speak to all as an equal and,
like to them, I go where I choose, I come from any place I choose, and
go where I choose." Then he is set free; and forthwith having no place
where he can eat, he looks for some man to flatter, some one with whom
he shall sup: then he either works with his body and endures the
most dreadful things; and if he can obtain a manger, he falls into a
slavery much worse than his former slavery; or even if he is become
rich, being a man without any knowledge of what is good, he loves some
little girl, and in his happiness laments and desires to be a slave
again. He says, "what evil did I suffer in my state of slavery?
Another clothed me, another supplied me with shoes, another fed me,
another looked after me in sickness; and I did only a few services for
him. But now a wretched man, what things I suffer, being a slave of
many instead of to one. But however," he says, "if I shall acquire
rings, then I shall live most prosperously and happily." First, in
order to acquire these rings, he submits to that which he is worthy
of; then, when he has acquired them, it is again all the same. Then he
says, "if I shall be engaged in military service, I am free from all
evils." He obtains military service. He suffers as much as a flogged
slave, and nevertheless he asks for a second service and a third.
After this, when he has put the finishing stroke to his career and
is become a senator, then he becomes a slave by entering into the
assembly, then he serves the finer and most splendid slavery- not to
be a fool, but to learn what Socrates taught, what is the nature of
each thing that exists, and that a man should not rashly adapt
preconceptions to the several things which are. For this is the
cause to men of all their evils, the not being able to adapt the
general preconceptions to the several things. But we have different
opinions. One man thinks that he is sick: not so however, but the fact
is that he does not adapt his preconceptions right. Another thinks
that he is poor; another that he has a severe father or mother; and
another, again, that Caesar is not favourable to him. But all this
is one and only one thing, the not knowing how to adapt the
preconceptions. For who has not a preconception of that which is
bad, that it is hurtful, that it ought to be avoided, that it ought in
every way to be guarded against? One preconception is not repugnant to
another, only where it comes to the matter of adaptation. What then is
this evil, which is both hurtful, and a thing to be avoided? He
answers, "Not to be Caesar's friend." He is gone far from the mark, he
has missed the adaptation, he is embarrassed, he seeks the things
which are not at all pertinent to the matter; for when he has
succeeded in being Caesar's friend, nevertheless he has failed in
finding what he sought. For what is that which every man seeks? To
live secure, to be happy, to do everything as he wishes, not to be
hindered, nor compelled. When then he is become the friend of
Caesar, is he free from hindrance? free from compulsion, is he
tranquil, is he happy? Of whom shall we inquire? What more trustworthy
witness have we than this very man who is, become Caesar's friend?
Come forward and tell us when did you sleep more quietly, now or
before you became Caesar's friend? Immediately you hear the answer,
"Stop, I entreat you, and do not mock me: you know not what miseries I
suffer, and sleep does not come to me; but one comes and says, 'Caesar
is already awake, he is now going forth': then come troubles and
cares." Well, when did you sup with more pleasure, now or before? Hear
what he says about this also. He says that if he is not invited, he is
pained: and if he is invited, he sups like a slave with his master,
all the while being anxious that he does not say or do anything
foolish. And what do you suppose that he is afraid of; lest he
should be lashed like a slave? How can he expect anything so good? No,
but as befits so great a man, Caesar's friend, he is afraid that he
may lose his head. And when did you bathe more free from trouble,
and take your gymnastic exercise more quietly? In fine, which kind
of life did you prefer? your present or your former life? I can
swear that no man is so stupid or so ignorant of truth as not to
bewail his own misfortunes the nearer he is in friendship to Caesar.

  Since, then, neither those who are called kings live as they choose,
nor the friends of kings, who finally are those who are free? Seek,
and you will find; for you have aids from nature for the discovery
of truth. But if you are not able yourself by going along these ways
only to discover that which follows, listen to those who have made the
inquiry. What do they say? Does freedom seem to you a good thing? "The
greatest good." Is it possible, then, that he who obtains the greatest
good can be unhappy or fare badly? "No." Whomsoever, then, you shall
see unhappy, unfortunate, lamenting, confidently declare that they are
not free. "I do declare it." We have now, then, got away from buying
and selling and from such arrangements about matters of property;
for if you have rightly assented to these matters, if the Great King
is unhappy, he cannot be free, nor can a little king, nor a man of
consular rank, nor one who has been twice consul. "Be it so."

  Further, then, answer me this question also: Does freedom seem to
you to be something great and noble and valuable? "How should it not
seem so?" Is it possible, then, when a man obtains anything, so
great and valuable and noble to be mean? "It is not possible." When,
then, you see any man subject to another, or flattering him contrary
to his own opinion, confidently affirm that this man also is not free;
and not only if he do this for a bit of supper, but also if he does it
for a government or a consulship: and call these men "little slaves"
who for the sake of little matters do these things, and those who do
so for the sake of great things call "great slaves," as they deserve
to be. "This is admitted also." Do you think that freedom is a thing
independent and self-governing? "Certainly." Whomsoever, then, it is
in the power of another to hinder and compel, declare that he is not
free. And do not look, I entreat you, after his grandfathers and
great-grandfathers, or inquire about his being bought or sold; but
if you hear him saying from his heart and with feeling, "Master," even
if the twelve fasces precede him, call him a slave. And if you hear
him say, "Wretch that I am, how much I suffer," call him a slave.
If, finally, you see him lamenting, complaining, unhappy, call him a
slave though he wears a praetexta. If, then, he is doing nothing of
this kind, do not yet say that he is free, but learn his opinions,
whether they are subject to compulsion, or may produce hindrance, or
to bad fortune; and if you find him such, call him a slave who has a
holiday in the Saturnalia: say that his master is from home: he will
return soon, and you will know what he suffers. "Who will return?"
Whoever has in himself the power over anything which is desired by the
man, either to give it to him or to take it away? "Thus, then, have we
many masters?" We have: for we have circumstances as masters prior
to our present masters; and these circumstances are many. Therefore it
must of necessity be that those who have the power over any of these
circumstances must be our masters. For no man fears Caesar himself,
but he fears death, banishment, deprivation of his property, prison,
and disgrace. Nor does any man love Caesar, unless Caesar is a
person of great merit, but he loves wealth, the office of tribune,
praetor or consul. When we love, and hate, and fear these things, it
must be that those who have the power over them must be our masters.
Therefore we adore them even as gods; for we think that what possesses
the power of conferring the greatest advantage on us is divine. Then
we wrongly assume that a certain person has the power of conferring
the greatest advantages; therefore he is something divine. For if we
wrongly assume that a certain person has the power of conferring the
greatest advantages, it is a necessary consequence that the conclusion
from these premises must be false.

  What, then, is that which makes a man free from hindrance and
makes him his own master? For wealth does not do it, nor consulship,
nor provincial government, nor royal power; but something else must be
discovered. What then is that which, when we write, makes us free from
hindrance and unimpeded? "The knowledge of the art of writing."
What, then, is it in playing the lute? "The science of playing the
lute." Therefore in life also it is the science of life. You have,
then, heard in a general way: but examine the thing also in the
several parts. Is it possible that he who desires any of the things
which depend on others can be free from hindrance? "No." Is it
possible for him to be unimpeded? "No." Therefore he cannot be free.
Consider then: whether we have nothing which is in our own power only,
or whether we have all things, or whether some things are in our own
power, and others in the power of others. "What do you mean?" When you
wish the body to be entire, is it in your power or not? "It is not
in my power." When you wish it to be healthy? "Neither is this in my
power." When you wish it to be handsome? "Nor is this." Life or death?
"Neither is this in my power." Your body, then, is another's,
subject to every man who is stronger than yourself? "It is." But
your estate, is it in your power to have it when you please, and as
long as you please, and such as you please? "No." And your slaves?
"No." And your clothes? "No." And your house? "No." And your horses?
"Not one of these things." And if you wish by all means your
children to live, or your wife, or your brother, or your friends, is
it in your power? "This also is not in my power."

  Whether, then, have you nothing which is in your own power, which
depends on yourself only and cannot be taken from you, or have you
anything of the kind? "I know not." Look at the thing, then, thus,
examine it. Is any man able to make you assent to that which is false?
"No man." In the matter of assent, then, you are free from hindrance
and obstruction. "Granted." Well; and can a man force you to desire to
move toward that to which you do not choose? "He can, for when he
threatens me with death or bonds, he compels me to desire to move
toward it." If, then, you despise death and bonds, do you still pay
any regard to him? "No." Is, then, the despising of death an act of
your own, or is it not yours? "It is my act." It is your own act,
then, also to desire to move toward a thing: or is it not so? "It is
my own act." But to desire to move away from a thing, whose act is
that? This also is your act. "What, then, if I have attempted to walk,
suppose another should hinder me." What part of you does he hinder?
does he hinder the faculty of assent? "No: but my poor body." Yes,
as he would do with a stone. "Granted; but I no longer walk." And
who told you that walking is your act free from hindrance? for I
said that this only was free from hindrance, to desire to move: but
where there is need of body and its co-operation, you have heard
long ago that nothing is your own. "Granted also." And who can
compel you to desire what you do not wish? "No man." And to propose,
or intend, or in short to make use of the appearances which present
themselves, can any man compel you? "He cannot do this: but he will
hinder me when I desire from obtaining what I desire." If you desire
anything which is your own, and one of the things which cannot be
hindered, how will he hinder you? "He cannot in any way." Who, then,
tells you that he who desires the things that belong to another is
free from hindrance?

  "Must I, then, not desire health?" By no means, nor anything else
that belongs to another: for what is not in your power to acquire or
to keep when you please, this belongs to another. Keep, then, far from
it not only your hands but, more than that, even your desires. If
you do not, you have surrendered yourself as a slave; you have
subjected your neck, if you admire anything not your own, to
everything that is dependent on the power of others and perishable, to
which you have conceived a liking. "Is not my hand my own?" It is a
part of your own body; but it is by nature earth, subject to
hindrance, compulsion, and the slave of everything which is
stronger. And why do I say your hand? You ought to possess your
whole body as a poor ass loaded, as long as it is possible, as long as
you are allowed. But if there be a press, and a soldier should lay
hold of it, let it go, do not resist, nor murmur; if you do, you
will receive blows, and nevertheless you will also lose the ass. But
when you ought to feel thus with respect to the body, consider what
remains to be done about all the rest, which is provided for the
sake of the body. When the body is an ass, all the other things are
bits belonging to the ass, pack-saddles, shoes, barley, fodder. Let
these also go: get rid of them quicker and more readily than of the
ass.

  When you have made this preparation, and have practiced this
discipline, to distinguish that which belongs to another from that
which is your own, the things which are subject to hindrance from
those which are not, to consider the things free from hindrance to
concern yourself, and those which are not free not to concern
yourself, to keep your desire steadily fixed to the things which do
concern yourself, and turned from the things which do not concern
yourself; do you still fear any man? "No one." For about what will you
be afraid? about the things which are your own, in which consists
the nature of good and evil? and who has power over these things?
who can take them away? who can impede them? No man can, no more
than he can impede God. But will you be afraid about your body and
your possessions, about things which are not yours, about things which
in no way concern you? and what else have you been studying from the
beginning than to distinguish between your own and not your own, the
things which are in your power and not in your power, the things
subject to hindrance and not subject? and why have you come to the
philosophers? was it that you may nevertheless be unfortunate and
unhappy? You will then in this way, as I have supposed you to have
done, be without fear and disturbance. And what is grief to you? for
fear comes from what you expect, but grief from that which is present.
But what further will you desire? For of the things which are within
the power of the will, as being good and present, you have a proper
and regulated desire: but of the things which are not in the power
of the will you do not desire any one, and so you do not allow any
place to that which is irrational, and impatient, and above measure
hasty.

  When, then, you are thus affected toward things, what man can any
longer be formidable to you? For what has a man which is formidable to
another, either when you see him or speak to him or, finally, are
conversant with him? Not more than one horse has with respect to
another, or one dog to another, or one bee to another bee. Things,
indeed, are formidable to every man; and when any man is able to
confer these things on another or to take them away, then he too
becomes formidable. How then is an acropolis demolished? Not by the
sword, not by fire, but by opinion. For if we abolish the acropolis
which is in the city, can we abolish also that of fever, and that of
beautiful women? Can we, in a word, abolish the acropolis which is
in us and cast out the tyrants within us, whom we have dally over
us, sometimes the same tyrants, at other times different tyrants?
But with this we must begin, and with this we must demolish the
acropolis and eject the tyrants, by giving up the body, the parts of
it, the faculties of it, the possessions, the reputation,
magisterial offices, honours, children, brothers, friends, by
considering all these things as belonging to others. And if tyrants
have been ejected from us, why do I still shut in the acropolis by a
wall of circumvallation, at least on my account; for if it still
stands, what does it do to me? why do I still eject guards? For
where do I perceive them? against others they have their fasces, and
their spears, and their swords. But I have never been hindered in my
will, nor compelled when I did not will. And how is this possible? I
have placed my movements toward action in obedience to God. Is it
His will that I shall have fever? It is my will also. Is it His will
that I should move toward anything? It is my will also. Is it His will
that I should obtain anything? It is my wish also. Does He not will? I
do not wish. Is it His will that I be put to the rack? It is my will
then to die; it is my will then to be put to the rack. Who, then, is
still able to hinder me contrary to my own judgement, or to compel me?
No more than he can hinder or compel Zeus.

  Thus the more cautious of travelers also act. A traveler has heard
that the road is infested by robbers; he does not venture to enter
on it alone, but he waits for the companionship on the road either
of an ambassador, or of a quaestor, or of a proconsul, and when he has
attached himself to such persons he goes along the road safely. So
in the world the wise man acts. There are many companies of robbers,
tyrants, storms, difficulties, losses of that which is dearest. "Where
is there any place of refuge? how shall he pass along without being
attacked by robbers? what company shall he wait for that he may pass
along in safety? to whom shall he attach himself? To what person
generally? to the rich man, to the man of consular rank? and what is
the use of that to me? Such a man is stripped himself, groans and
laments. But what if the fellow-companion himself turns against me and
becomes my robber, what shall I do? I will be 'a friend of Caesar':
when I am Caesar's companion no man will wrong me. In the first place,
that I may become illustrious, what things must I endure and suffer?
how often and by how many must I he robbed? Then, if I become Caesar's
friend, he also is mortal. And if Caesar from any circumstance becomes
my enemy, where is it best for me to retire? Into a desert? Well, does
fever not come there? What shall be done then? Is it not possible to
find a safe fellow traveler, a faithful one, strong, secure against
all surprises?" Thus he considers and perceives that if he attaches
himself to God, he will make his journey in safety.

  "How do you understand 'attaching yourself to God'?" In this
sense, that whatever God wills, a man also shall will; and what God
does not will, a man shall not will. How, then, shall this he done? In
what other way than by examining the movements of God and his
administration What has He given to me as my own and in my own
power? what has He reserved to Himself? He has given to me the
things which are in the power of the will: He has put them in my power
free from impediment and hindrance. How was He able to make the
earthly body free from hindrance? And accordingly He has subjected
to the revolution of the whole, possessions, household things,
house, children, wife. Why, then, do I fight against God? why do I
will what does not depend on the will? why do I will to have
absolutely what is not granted to ma? But how ought I to will to
have things? In the way in which they are given and as long as they
are given. But He who has given takes away. Why then do I resist? I do
not say that I shall be fool if I use force to one who is stronger,
but I shall first be unjust. For whence had I things when I came
into the world? My father gave them to me. And who gave them to him?
and who made the sun? and who made the fruits of the earth? and who
the seasons? and who made the connection of men with one another and
their fellowship?

  Then after receiving everything from another and even yourself,
are you angry and do you blame the Giver if he takes anything from
you? Who are you, and for what purpose did you come into the world?
Did not He introduce you here, did He not show you the light, did he
not give you fellow-workers, and perception, and reason? and as whom
did He introduce you here? did He not introduce you as a subject to
death, and as one to live on the earth with a little flesh, and to
observe His administration, and to join with Him in the spectacle
and the festival for a short time? Will you not, then, as long as
you have been permitted, after seeing the spectacle and the solemnity,
when he leads you out, go with adoration of Him and thanks for what
you have seen, and heard? "No; but I would, still enjoy the feast."
The initiated, too, would wish to be longer in the initiation: and
perhaps also those, at Olympia to see other athletes; but the
solemnity is ended: go away like a grateful and modest man; make
room for others: others also must be born, as you were, and being born
they must have a place, and houses and necessary things. And if the
first do not retire, what remains? Why ire you insatiable? Why are you
not content? why do you contract the world? "Yes, but I would have
my little children with me and my wife." What, are they yours? do they
not belong to the Giver, and to Him who made you? then will you not
give up what belongs to others? will you not give way to Him who is
superior? "Why, then, did He introduce me into the world on these
conditions," And if the conditions do not suit you depart. He has no
need of a spectator who is not satisfied. He wants those who join in
the festival, those who take part in the chorus, that they may
rather applaud, admire, and celebrate with hymns the solemnity. But
those who can bear no trouble, and the cowardly He will not
willingly see absent from the great assembly; for they did not when
they were present behave as they ought to do at a festival nor fill up
their place properly, but they lamented, found fault with the deity,
fortune, their companions; not seeing both what they had. and their
own powers, which they received for contrary purposes, the powers of
magnanimity, of a generous mind, manly spirit, and what we are now
inquiring about, freedom. "For what purpose, then, have I received
these things? To use them. "How long;" So long as He who his lent them
chooses. "What if they are necessary to me?" Do not attach yourself to
them and they will not be necessary: do not say to yourself that
they are necessary, and then they are not necessary.

  This study you ought to practice from morning to evening, beginning,
with the smallest things and those most liable to damage, with an
earthen pot, with a cup. Then proceed in this way to a tunic to a
little dog, to a horse, to a small estate in land: then to yourself,
to your body, to the parts of your body, to your brothers. Look all
round and throw these things from you. Purge your opinions so that
nothing cleave to you of the things which are not your own, that
nothing grow to you, that nothing give you pain when it is torn from
you; and say, while you are daily exercising yourself as you do there,
not that you are philosophizing, for this is an arrogant expression,
but that you are presenting an asserter of freedom: for this is really
freedom. To this freedom Diogenes was called by Antisthenes, and he
said that he could no longer be enslaved by any man. For this reason
when he was taken prisoner, how did he behave to the pirates? Did he
call any of them master? and I do not speak of the name, for I am
not afraid of the word, but of the state of mind by which the word
is produced. How did he reprove them for feeding badly their captives?
How was he sold? Did he seek a master? no; but a slave, And, when he
was sold, how did he behave to his master? Immediately he disputed
with him and said to his master that he ought not to be dressed as
he was, nor shaved in such a manner; and about the children he told
them how he ought to bring them up. And what was strange in this?
for if his master had bought an exercise master, would he have
employed him in the exercises of the palaestra as a servant or as a
master? and so if he had bought a physician or an architect. And so,
in every matter, it is absolutely necessary that he who has skill must
be the superior of him who has not. Whoever, then, generally possesses
the science of life, what else must he be than master? For who is
master of a ship? "The man who governs the helm." Why? Because he
who will not obey him suffers for it. "But a master can give me
stripes." Can he do it, then, without suffering for it?' "So I also
used to think." But because he can not do it without suffering for it,
for this reason it is not in his power: and no man can do what is
unjust without suffering for it. "And what is the penalty for him
who puts his own slave in chains, what do you think that is?" The fact
of putting the slave in chains: and you also will admit this, if you
choose to maintain the truth, that man is not a wild beast, but a tame
animal. For when is a a vine doing badly? When it is in a condition
contrary to its nature. When is a cock? Just the same. Therefore a man
also is so. What then is a man's nature? To bite, to kick, and to
throw into prison and to behead? No; but to do good, to co-operate
with others, to wish them well. At that time, then, he is in a bad
condition, whether you choose to admit it or not, when he is acting
foolishly.

  "Socrates, then, did not fare badly?" No; but his judges aid his
accusers did. "Nor did Helvidius at Rome fare badly?" No; but his
murderer did. "How do you mean?" The same as you do when you say
that a cock has not fared badly when he has gained the victory and
been severely wounded; but that the cock has fared badly when he has
been defeated and is unhurt: nor do you call a dog fortunate who
neither pursues game nor labors, but when you see him sweating, when
you see him in pain and panting violently after running. What
paradox do we utter if we say that the evil in everything's that which
is contrary to the nature of the thing? Is that a paradox? for do
you not say this in the case of all other things? Why then in the case
of man only do you think differently, But because we say that the
nature of man is tame and social and faithful, you will not say that
this is a paradox? "It is not." What then is it a paradox to say
that a man is not hurt when he is whipped, or put in chains, or
beheaded? does he not, if he suffers nobly, come off even with
increased advantage and profit? But is he not hurt, who suffers in a
most pitiful and disgraceful way, who in place of a man becomes a
wolf, or viper or wasp?

  Well then let us recapitulate the things which have been agreed
on. The man who is not under restraint is free, to whom things are
exactly in that state in which he wishes them to be; but he who can be
restrained or compelled or hindered, or thrown into any
circumstances against his will, is a slave. But who is free from
restraint? He who desires nothing that belongs to others. And what are
the things which belong to others? Those which are not in our power
either to have or not to have, or to have of a certain kind or in a
certain manner. Therefore the body belongs to another, the parts of
the body belong to another, possession belongs to another. If, then,
you are attached to any of these things as your own, you will pay
the penalty which it is proper for him to pay who desires what belongs
to another. This road leads to freedom, that is the only way of
escaping from slavery, to be able to say at last with all your soul

     Lead me, O Zeus, and thou O destiny,

     The way that I am bid by you to go.

But what do you say, philosopher? The tyrant summons you to say
something which does not become you. Do you say it or do you not?
Answer me. "Let me consider." Will you consider now? But when you were
in the school, what was it which you used to consider? Did you not
study what are the things that are good and what are bad, and what
things are neither one nor the other? "I did." What then was our
opinion? "That just and honourable acts were good; and that unjust and
disgraceful acts were bad." Is life a good thing? "No." Is death a bad
thing? "No." Is prison? "No." But what did we think about mean and
faithless words and betrayal of a friend and flattery of a tyrant?
"That they are bad." Well then, you are not considering, nor have
you considered nor deliberated. For what is the matter for
consideration: is it whether it is becoming for me, when I have it
in my power, to secure for myself the greatest of good things, and not
to secure for myself the greatest evils? A fine inquiry indeed, and
necessary, and one that demands much deliberation. Man, why do you
mock us? Such an inquiry is never made. If you really imagined that
base things were bad and honourable things were good, and that all
other things were neither good nor bad, you would not even have
approached this inquiry, nor have come near it; but immediately you
would have been able to distinguish them by the understanding as you
would do by the vision. For when do you inquire if black things are
white, if heavy things are light, and do not comprehend the manifest
evidence of the senses? How, then, do you now say that you are
considering whether things which are neither good nor bad ought to
be avoided more than things which are bad? But you do not possess
these opinions; and neither do these things seem to you to he
neither good nor bad, but you think that they are the greatest
evils; nor do you think those other things to be evils, but matters
which do not concern us at all. For thus from the beginning you have
accustomed yourself. "Where am I? In the schools: and are any
listening to me? I am discoursing among philosophers. But I have
gone out of the school. Away with this talk of scholars and fools."
Thus a friend is overpowered by the testimony of a philosopher: thus a
philosopher becomes a parasite; thus he lets himself for hire for
money: thus in the senate a man does not say what he thinks; in
private he proclaims his opinions. You are a cold and miserable little
opinion, suspended from idle words as from a hair. But keep yourself
strong and fit for the uses of life and initiated by being exercised
in action. How do you hear? I do not say that your child is dead-
for how could you bear that?- but that your oil is spilled, your
wine drunk up. Do you act in such a way that one standing by you while
you are making a great noise, may say this only, "Philosopher, you say
something different in the school. Why do you deceive us? Why, when
you are only a worm, do you say that you are a man?" I should like
to be present when one of the philosophers is lying with a woman, that
I might see how he is exerting himself, and what words he is uttering,
and whether he remembers his title of philosopher, and the words which
he hears or says or reads.

  "And what is this to liberty?" Nothing else than this, whether you
who are rich choose or not. "And who is your evidence for this?" who
else than yourselves? who have a powerful master, and who live in
obedience to his nod and motion, and who faint if he only looks at you
with a scowling countenance; you who court old women and old men,
and say, "I cannot do this: it is not in my power." Why is it not in
your power? Did you not lately contend with me and say that you are
free "But Aprulla has hindered me." Tell the truth, then, slave, and
do not run away from your masters, nor deny, nor venture to produce
any one to assert your freedom, when you have so many evidences of
your slavery. And indeed when a man is compelled by love to do
something contrary to his opinion, and at the same time sees the
better but has not the strength to follow it, one might consider him
still more worthy of excuse as being held by a certain violent and, in
a manner, a divine power. But who could endure you who are in love
with old women and old men, and wipe the old women's noses, and wash
them and give them presents, and also wait on them like a slave when
they are sick, and at the same time wish them dead, and question the
physicians whether they are sick unto death? And again, when in
order to obtain these great and much admired magistracies and honours,
you kiss the hands of these slaves of others, and so you are not the
slave even of free men. Then you walk about before me in stately
fashion, praetor or a consul. Do I not know how you became a
praetor, by what means you got your consulship, who gave it to you?
I would not even choose to live, if I must live by help of Felicion
and endure his arrogance and servile insolence: for I know what a
slave is, who is fortunate, as he thinks, and puffed up by pride.

  "You then," a man may say, "are you free?" I wish, by the Gods,
and pray to be free; but I am not yet able to face my masters, I still
value my poor body, I value greatly the preservation of it entire,
though I do not possess it entire. But I can point out to you a free
man, that you may no longer seek an example. Diogenes was free. How
was he free?- not because he was born of free parents, but because
he was himself free, because he had cast off all the handles of
slavery, and it was not possible for any man to approach him, nor
had any man the means of laying hold of him to enslave him. He had
everything easily loosed, everything only hanging to him. If you
laid hold of his property, he would rather have let it go and be yours
than he would have followed you for it: if you had laid hold of his
leg, he would have let go his leg; if of all his body, all his poor
body; his intimates, friends, country, just the same. For he knew from
whence he had them, and from whom, and on what conditions. His true
parents indeed, the Gods, and his real country he would never have
deserted, nor would he have yielded to any man in obedience to them or
to their orders, nor would any man have died for his country more
readily. For he was not used to inquire when he should be considered
to have done anything on behalf of the whole of things, but he
remembered that everything which is done comes from thence and is done
on behalf of that country and is commanded by him who administers
it. Therefore see what Diogenes himself says and writes: "For this
reason," he says, "Diogenes, it is in your power to speak both with
the King of the Persians and with Archidamus the king of the
Lacedaemonians, as you please." Was it because he was born of free
parents? I suppose all the Athenians and all the Lacedaemonians,
because they were born of slaves, could not talk with them as they
wished, but feared and paid court to them. Why then does he say that
it is in his power? "Because I do not consider the poor body to be
my own, because I want nothing, because law is everything to me, and
nothing else is." These were the things which permitted him to be
free.

  And that you may not think that I show you the example of a man
who is a solitary person, who has neither wife nor children, nor
country, nor friends nor kinsmen, by whom he could be bent and drawn
in various directions, take Socrates and observe that he had a wife
and children, but he did not consider them as his own; that he had a
country, so long as it was fit to have one, and in such a manner as
was fit; friends and kinsmen also, but he held all in subjection to
law and to the obedience due to it. For this reason he was the first
to go out as a soldier, when it was necessary; and in war he exposed
himself to danger most unsparingly, and when he was sent by the
tyrants to seize Leon, he did not even deliberate about the matter,
because he thought that it was a base action, and he knew that he must
die, if it so happened. And what difference did that make to him?
for he intended to preserve something else, not his poor flesh, but
his fidelity, his honourable character. These are things which could
not be assailed nor brought into subjection. Then, when he was obliged
to speak in defense of his life, did he behave like a man who had
children, who had a wife? No, but he behaved like a man who has
neither. And what did he do when he was to drink the poison, and
when he had the power of escaping from prison, and when Crito said
to him, "Escape for the sake of your children," what did Socrates say?
Did he consider the power of escape as an unexpected gain? By no
means: he considered what was fit and proper; but the rest he did
not even look at or take into the reckoning. For he did not choose, he
said, to save his poor body, but to save that which is increased and
saved by doing what is just, and is impaired and destroyed by doing
what is unjust. Socrates will not save his life by a base act; he
who would not put the Athenians to the vote when they clamoured that
he should do so, he who refused to obey the tyrants, he who discoursed
in such a manner about virtue and right behavior. It is not possible
to save such a man's life by base acts, but he is saved by dying,
not by running away. For the good actor also preserves his character
by stopping when he ought to stop, better than when he goes on
acting beyond the proper time. What then shall the children of
Socrates do? "If," said Socrates, "I had gone off to Thessaly, would
you have taken care of them; and if I depart to the world below,
will there be no man to take care of them?" See how he gives to
death a gentle name and mocks it. But if you and I had been in his
place, we should have immediately answered as philosophers that
those who act unjustly must be repaid in the same way, and we should
have added, "I shall be useful to many, if my life is saved, and if
I die, I shall be useful to no man." For, if it had been necessary, we
should have made our escape by slipping through a small hole. And
how in that case should we have been useful to any man? for where
would they have been then staying? or if we were useful to men while
we were alive, should we not have been much more useful to them by
dying when we ought to die, and as we ought? And now, Socrates being
dead, no less useful to men, and even more useful, is the
remembrance of that which he did or said when he was alive.

  Think of these things, these opinions, these words: look to these
examples, if you would be free, if you desire the thing according to
its worth. And what is the wonder if you buy so great a thing at the
price of things so many and so great? For the sake of this which is
called "liberty," some hang themselves, others throw themselves down
precipices, and sometimes even whole cities have perished: and will
you not for the sake of the true and unassailable and secure liberty
give back to God when He demands them the things which He has given?
Will you not, as Plato says, study not to die only, but also to endure
torture, and exile, and scourging, and, in a word, to give up all
which is not your own? If you will not, you will be a slave among
slaves, even you be ten thousand times a consul; and if you make
your way up to the Palace, you will no less be a slave; and you will
feel, that perhaps philosophers utter words which are contrary to
common opinion, as Cleanthes also said, but not words contrary to
reason. For you will know by experience that the words are true, and
that there is no profit from the things which are valued and eagerly
sought to those who have obtained them; and to those who have not
yet obtained them there is an imagination that when these things are
come, all that is good will come with them; then, when they are
come, the feverish feeling is the same, the tossing to and fro is
the same, the satiety, the desire of things which are not present; for
freedom is acquired not by the full possession of the things which are
desired, but by removing the desire. And that you may know that this
is true, as you have laboured for those things, so transfer your
labour to these; be vigilant for the purpose of acquiring an opinion
which will make you free; pay court to a philosopher instead of to a
rich old man: be seen about a philosopher's doors: you will not
disgrace yourself by being seen; you will not go away empty nor
without profit, if you go to the philosopher as you ought, and if not,
try at least: the trial is not disgraceful.

  CHAPTER 2

  On familiar intimacy

  To This matter before all you must attend: that you be never so
closely connected with any of your former intimates or friends as to
come down to the same acts as he does. If you do not observe this
rule, you will ruin yourself. But if the thought arises in your
mind. "I shall seem disobliging to him, and he will not have the
same feeling toward me," remember that nothing is done without cost,
nor is it possible for a man if he does not do the same to be the same
man that he was. Choose, then, which of the two you will have, to be
equally loved by those by whom you were formerly loved, being the same
with your former self; or, being superior, not to obtain from your
friends the same that you did before. For if this is better, turn away
to it, and let not other considerations draw you in a different
direction. For no man is able to make progress, when he is wavering
between opposite things, but if you have preferred this to all things,
if you choose to attend to this only, to work out this only, give up
everything else. But if you will not do this, your wavering will
produce both these results: you will neither improve as you ought, nor
will you obtain what you formerly obtained. For before, by plainly
desiring the things which were worth nothing, you pleased your
associates. But you cannot excel in both kinds, and it is necessary
that so far as you share in the one, you must fall short in the other.
You cannot, when you do not drink with those with whom you used to
drink, he agreeable to them as you were before. Choose, then,
whether you will be a hard drinker and pleasant to your former
associates or a sober man and disagreeable to them. You cannot, when
you do not sing with those with whom you used to sing, be equally
loved by them. Choose, then, in this matter also which of the two
you will have. For if it is better to be modest and orderly than for a
man to say, "He is a jolly fellow," give up the rest, renounce it,
turn away from it, have nothing to do with such men. But if this
behavior shall not please you, turn altogether to the opposite: become
a catamite, an adulterer, and act accordingly, and you will get what
you wish. And jump up in the theatre and bawl out in praise of the
dancer. But characters so different cannot be mingled: you cannot
act both Thersites and Agamemnon. If you intend to be Thersites, you
must be humpbacked and bald: if Agamemnon, you must be tall and
handsome, and love those who are placed in obedience to you.

  CHAPTER 3

  What things we should exchange for other things

  Keep this thought in readiness, when you lose anything external,
what you acquire in place of it; and if it be worth more, never say,
"I have had a loss"; neither if you have got a horse in place of an
ass, or an ox in place of a sheep, nor a good action in place of a bit
of money, nor in place of idle talk such tranquillity as befits a man,
nor in place of lewd talk if you have acquired modesty. If you
remember this, you will always maintain your character such as it
ought to be. But if you do not, consider that the times of opportunity
are perishing, and that whatever pains you take about yourself, you
are going to waste them all and overturn them. And it needs only a few
things for the loss and overturning of all, namely a small deviation
from reason. For the steerer of a ship to upset it, he has no need
of the same means as he has need of for saving it: but if he turns
it a little to the wind, it is lost; and if he does not do this
purposely, but has been neglecting his duty a little, the ship is
lost. Something of the kind happens in this case also: if you only
fall to nodding a little, all that you have up to this time
collected is gone. Attend therefore to the appearances of things,
and watch over them; for that which you have to preserve is no small
matter, but it is modesty and fidelity and constancy, freedom from the
affects, a state of mind undisturbed, freedom from fear, tranquillity,
in a word, "liberty." For what will you sell these things? See what is
the value of the things which you will obtain in exchange for these.
"But shall I not obtain any such thing for it?" See, and if you do
in return get that, see what you receive in place of it. "I possess
decency, he possesses a tribuneship: be possesses a praetorship, I
possess modesty. But I do not make acclamations where it is not
becoming: I will not stand up where I ought not; for I am free, and
a friend of God, and so I obey Him willingly. But I must not claim
anything else, neither body nor possession, nor magistracy, nor good
report, nor in fact anything. For He does not allow me to claim
them: for if He had chosen, He would have made them good for me; but
He has not done so, and for this reason I cannot transgress his
commands." Preserve that which is your own good in everything; and
as to every other thing, as it is permitted, and so far as to behave
consistently with reason in respect to them, content with this only.
If you do not, you will be unfortunate, you will fall in all things,
you will be hindered, you will be impeded. These are the laws which
have been sent from thence; these are the orders. Of these laws a
man ought to be an expositor, to these he ought to submit, not to
those of Masurius and Cassius.

  CHAPTER 4

  To those who are desirous of passing life in tranquility

  Remember that not only the desire of power and of riches makes us
mean and subject to others, but even the desire of tranquillity, and
of leisure. and of traveling abroad, and of learning. For, to speak
plainly, whatever the external thing may be, the value which we set
upon it places us in subjection to others. What, then, is the
difference between desiring, to be a senator or not desiring to be
one; what is the difference between desiring power or being content
with a private station; what is the difference between saying, "I am
unhappy, I have nothing, to do, but I am bound to my books as a
corpse"; or saying, "I am unhappy, I have no leisure for reading"? For
as salutations and power are things external and independent of the
will, so is a book. For what purpose do you choose to read? Tell me.
For if you only direct your purpose to being amused or learning
something, you are a silly fellow and incapable of enduring labour.
But if you refer reading to the proper end, what else is this than a
tranquil and happy life? But if reading does not secure for you a
happy and tranquil life, what is the use of it? But it does secure
this," the man replies, "and for this reason I am vexed that I am
deprived of it." And what is this tranquil and happy life, which any
man can impede; I do not say Caesar or Caesar's friend, but a crow,
a piper, a fever, and thirty thousand other things? But a tranquil and
happy life contains nothing so sure is continuity and freedom from
obstacle. Now I am called to do something: I will go, then, with the
purpose of observing the measures which I must keep, of acting with
modesty, steadiness, without desire and aversion to things external;
and then that I may attend to men, what they say, how they are
moved; and this not with any bad disposition, or that I may have
something to blame or to ridicule; but I turn to myself, and ask if
I also commit the same faults. "How then shall I cease to commit
them?" Formerly I also acted wrong, but now I do not: thanks to God.

  Come, when you have done these things and have attended to them,
have you done a worse act than when you have read a thousand verses or
written as many? For when you eat, are you grieved because you are not
reading? are you not satisfied with eating according to what you
have learned by reading, and so with bathing and with exercise? Why,
then, do you not act consistently in all things, both when you
approach Caesar and when you approach any person? If you maintain
yourself free from perturbation, free from alarm, and steady; if you
look rather at the things which are done and happen than are looked at
yourself; if you do not envy those who are preferred before you; if
surrounding circumstances do not strike you with fear or admiration,
what do you want? Books? How or for what purpose? for is not this a
preparation for life? and is not life itself made up of certain
other things than this? This is just as if an athlete should weep when
he enters the stadium, because he is not being exercised outside of
it. It was for this purpose that you used to practice exercise; for
this purpose were used the halteres, the dust, the young men as
antagonists; and do you seek for those things now when it is the
time of action? This is just as if in the topic of assent when
appearances present themselves, some of which can he comprehended, and
some cannot be comprehended, we should not choose to distinguish
them but should choose to read what has been written about
comprehension.

  What then is the reason of this? The reason is that we have never
read for this purpose, we have never written for this purpose, so that
we may in our actions use in a way conformable to nature the
appearances presented to us; but we terminate in this, in learning
what is said, and in being able to expound it to another, in resolving
a syllogism, and in handling the hypothetical syllogism. For this
reason where our study is, there alone is the impediment. Would you
have by all means the things which are not in your power? Be prevented
then, be hindered, fail in your purpose. But if we read what is
written about action, not that we may see what is said about action,
but that we may act well: if we read what is said about desire and
aversion, in order that we may neither fall in our desires, nor fall
into that which we try to avoid: if we read what is said about duty,
in order that, remembering the relations, we may do nothing
irrationally nor contrary to these relations; we should not be vexed
in being hindered as to our readings, but we should be satisfied
with doing, the acts which are conformable, and we should be reckoning
not what so far we have been accustomed to reckon; "To-day I have read
so many verses, I have written so many"; but, "To-day I have
employed my action as it is taught by the philosophers; I have not
employed any desire; I have used avoidance only with respect to things
which are within the power of my will; I have not been afraid of
such a person, I have not been prevailed upon by the entreaties of
another; I have exercised my patience, my abstinence my co-operation
with others"; and so we should thank God for what we ought to thank
Him.

  But now we do not know that we also in another way are like the
many. Another man is afraid that he shall not have power: you are
afraid that you will. Do not do so, my man; but as you ridicule him
who is afraid that he, shall not have power, so ridicule yourself
also. For it makes no difference whether you are thirsty like a man
who has a fever, or have a dread of water like a man who is mad. Or
how will you still be able to say as Socrates did, "If so it pleases
God, so let it be"? Do you think that Socrates, if he had been eager
to pass his leisure in the Lyceum or in the Academy and to discourse
dally with the young men, would have readily served in military
expeditions so often as he did; and would he not have lamented and
groaned, "Wretch that I am; I must now be miserable here, when I might
be sunning myself in the Lyceum"? Why, was this your business, to
sun yourself? And is it not your business to be happy, to be free from
hindrance, free from impediment? And could he still have been
Socrates, if he had lamented in this way: how would he still have been
able to write Paeans in his prison?

  In short, remember this, that what you shall prize which is beyond
your will, so far you have destroyed your will. But these things are
out of the power of the will, not only power, but also a private
condition: not only occupation, but also leisure. "Now, then, must I
live in this tumult?" Why do you say "tumult"? "I mean among many
men." Well what is the hardship? Suppose that you are at Olympia:
imagine it to be a panegyris, where one is calling out one thing,
another is doing another thing, and a third is pushing another person:
in the baths there is a crowd: and who of us is not pleased with
this assembly and leaves it unwillingly, Be not difficult to please
nor fastidious about what happens. "Vinegar is disagreeable, for it is
sharp; honey is disagreeable, for it disturbs my habit of body. I do
not like vegetables." So also, "I do not like leisure; it is a desert:
I do not like a crowd; it is confusion." But if circumstances make
it necessary for you to live alone or with a few, call it quiet and
use the thing as you ought: talk with yourself, exercise the
appearances, work up your preconceptions. If you fall into a crowd,
call it a celebration of games, a panegyris, a festival: try to
enjoy the festival with other men. For what is a more pleasant sight
to him who loves mankind than a number of men? We see with pleasure
herds of horses or oxen: we are delighted when we see many ships:
who is pained when he sees many men? "But they deafen me with their
cries." Then your hearing is impeded. What, then, is this to you?
Is, then, the power of making use of appearances hindered? And who
prevents you from using, according to nature, inclination to a thing
and aversion from it; and movement toward a thing and movement from
it? What tumult is able to do this?

  Do you only bear in mind the general rules: "What is mine, what is
not mine; what is given to me; what does God will that I should do
now? what does He not will?" A little before he willed you to be at
leisure, to talk with yourself, to write about these things, to
read, to hear, to prepare yourself. You had sufficient time for
this. Now He says to you: "Come now to the contest; show us what you
have learned, how you have practiced the athletic art. How long will
you be exercised alone? Now is the opportunity for you to learn
whether you are an athlete worthy of victory, or one of those who go
about the world and are defeated." Why, then, are; you vexed? No
contest is without confusion. There be many who exercise themselves
for the contests, many who call out to those who exercise
themselves, many masters, many spectators. "But my wish is to live
quietly." Lament, then, and groan as you deserve to do. For what other
is a greater punishment than this to the untaught man and to him who
disobeys the divine commands: to be grieved, to lament, to envy, in
a word, to be disappointed and to he unhappy? Would you not release
yourself from these things? "And how shall I release myself?" Have you
not often heard that you ought to remove entirely desire, apply
aversion to those things only which are within your power, that you
ought to give up everything, body, property, fame, books, tumult,
power, private station? for whatever way you turn, you are a slave,
you are subjected, you are hindered, you are compelled, you are
entirely in the power of others. But keep the words of Cleanthes in
readiness,

     Lead me, O Zeus, and thou necessity.

  Is it your will that I should go to Rome? I will go to Rome. To
Gyara? I will go to Gyara. I will go to Athens? I will go to Athens.
To prison? I will go to prison. If you should once say, "When shall
a man go to Athens?" you are undone. It is a necessary consequence
that this desire, if it is not accomplished, must make you unhappy;
and if it is accomplished, it must make you vain, since you are elated
at things at which you ought not to be elated; and on the other
hand, if you are impeded, it must make you wretched because you fall
into that which you would not fall into. Give up then all these
things. "Athens is a good place." But happiness is much better; and to
be free from passions, free from disturbance, for your affairs not
to depend on any man. "There is tumult at Rome and visits of
salutation." But happiness is an equivalent for all troublesome
things. If, then, the time comes for these things, why do you not take
away the wish to avoid them? what necessity is there to carry to avoid
a burden like an ass, and to be beaten with a stick? But if you do not
so, consider that you must always be a slave to him who has it in
his power to effect your release, and also to impede you, and you must
serve him as an evil genius.

  There is only one way to happiness, and let this rule be ready
both in the morning and during the day and by night; the rule is not
to look toward things which are out of the power of our will, to think
that nothing is our own, to give up all things to the Divinity, to
Fortune; to make them the superintendents of these things, whom Zeus
also has made so; for a man to observe that only which is his own,
that which cannot be hindered; and when we read, to refer our
reading to this only, and our writing and our listening. For this
reason, I cannot call the man industrious, if I hear this only, that
he reads and writes; and even if a man adds that he reads all night, I
cannot say so, if he knows not to what he should refer his reading.
For neither do you say that a man is industrious if he keeps awake for
a girl; nor do I. But if he does it for reputation, I say that he is a
lover of reputation. And if he does it for money, I say that he is a
lover of money, not a lover of labour; and if he does it through
love of learning, I say that he is a lover of learning. But if he
refers his labour to his own ruling power, that he may keep it in a
state conformable to nature and pass his life in that state, then only
do I say that he is industrious. For never commend a man on account of
these things which are common to all, but on account of his
opinions; for these are the things which belong to each man, which
make his actions bad or good. Remembering these rules, rejoice in that
which is present, and be content with the things which come in season.
If you see anything which you have learned and inquired about
occurring, to you in your course of life, be delighted at it. If you
have laid aside or have lessened bad disposition and a habit of
reviling; if you have done so with rash temper, obscene words,
hastiness, sluggishness; if you are not moved by what you formerly
were, and not in the same way as you once were, you can celebrate a
festival daily, to-day because you have behaved well in one act, and
to-morrow because you have behaved well in another. How much greater
is this a reason for making sacrifices than a consulship or the
government of a province? These things come to you from yourself and
from the gods. Remember this, Who gives these things and to whom,
and for what purpose. If you cherish yourself in these thoughts, do
you still think that it makes any difference where yon shall be happy,
where you shall please God? Are not the gods equally distant from
all places? Do they not see from all places alike that which is
going on?

  CHAPTER 5

  Against the quarrelsome and ferocious

  The wise and good man neither himself fights with any person, nor
does he allow another, so far as he can prevent it. And an example
of this as well as of all other things is proposed to us in the life
of Socrates, who not only himself on all occasions avoided fights, but
would not allow even others to quarrel. See in Xenophon's Symposium
how many quarrels he settled; how further he endured Thrasymachus
and Polus and Callicles; how he tolerated his wife, and how he
tolerated his son who attempted to confute him aid to cavil with
him. For he remembered well that no man has in his power another man's
ruling principle. He wished, therefore nothing else than that which
was his own. And what is this? Not that this or that man may act
according to nature; for that is a thing which belongs to another; but
that while others are doing their own acts, as they choose, he may
never the less be in a condition conformable to nature and live in it,
only doing what is his own to the end that others also may be in a
state conformable to nature. For this is the object always set
before him by the wise and good man. Is it to be commander of an army?
No: but if it is permitted him, his object is in this matter to
maintain his own ruling principle. Is it to marry? No; but if marriage
is allowed to him, in this matter his object is to maintain himself in
a condition conformable to nature. But if he would have his son not to
do wrong, or his wife, he would have what belongs to another not to
belong to another; and to he instructed is this: to learn what
things are a man's own and what belongs to another.

  How, then, is there left any place for fighting, to a man who has
this opinion? Is he surprised at anything which happens, and does it
appear new to him? Does he not expect that which comes from the bad to
be worse and more grievous than what actually befalls him? And does he
not reckon as pure gain whatever they may do which falls short of
extreme wickedness? "Such a person has reviled you." Great thanks to
him for not having, struck you. "But he has struck me also." Great
thanks that he did not wound you "But he wounded me also." Great
thanks that he did not kill you. For when did he learn or in what
school that man is a tame animal, that men love one another, that an
act of injustice is a great harm to him who does it. Since then he has
not to him who does it. Since then he has not learned this and is
not convinced of it, why shall he not follow that which seems to be
for his own "Your neighbour has thrown stones." Have you then done
anything wrong? "But the things in the house have been broken." Are
you then a utensil? No; but a free power of will. What, then, is given
to you in answer to this? If you are like a wolf, you must bite in
return, and throw more stones. But if you consider what is proper
for a man, examine your store-house, see with at faculties you came
into the world. Have you the disposition of a wild beast, Have you the
disposition of revenge for an injury? When is a horse wretched? When
he is deprived of his natural faculties; not when he cannot crow
like a cock, but when he cannot run. When is a dog wretched? Not
when he cannot fly, but when he cannot track his game. Is, then, a man
also unhappy in this way, not because he cannot strangle lions or
embrace statues, for he did not come into the world in the
possession of certain powers from nature for this purpose, but because
he has lost his probity and his fidelity? People ought to meet and
lament such a man for the misfortunes into which he has fallen; not
indeed to lament because a man his been born or has died, but
because it has happened to him in his lifetime to have lost the things
which are his own, not that which he received from his father, not his
land and house, and his inn, and his slaves; for not one of these
things is a man's own, but all belong to others, are servile and
subject to account, at different times given to different persons by
those who have them in their power: but I mean the things which belong
to him as a man, the marks in his mind with which he came into the
world, such as we seek also on coins, and if we find them, we
approve of the coins, and if we do not find the marks, we reject them.
What is the stamp on this Sestertius? "The stamp of Trajan." Present
it. "It is the stamp of Nero." Throw it away: it cannot be accepted,
it is counterfeit. So also in this case. What is the stamp of his
opinions? "It is gentleness, a sociable disposition, a tolerant
temper, a disposition to mutual affection." Produce these qualities. I
accept them: I consider this man a citizen, I accept him as a
neighbour, a companion in my voyages. Only see that he has not
Nero's stamp. Is he passionate, is he full of resentment, is he
faultfinding? If the whim seizes him, does he break the heads of those
who come in his way? Why, then did you say that he is a man? Is
everything judged by the bare form? If that is so, say that the form
in wax is all apple and has the smell and the taste of an apple. But
the external figure is not enough: neither then is the nose enough and
the eyes to make the man, but he must have the opinions of a man. Here
is a man who does not listen to reason, who does not know when he is
refuted: he is an ass: in another man the sense of shame is become
dead: he is good for nothing, he is anything rather than a man. This
man seeks whom he may meet and kick or bite, so that he is not even
a sheep or an ass, but a kind of wild beast.

  "What then would you have me to be despised?" By whom? by those
who know you? and how and how shall those who know you despise a man
who is gentle and modest? Perhaps you mean by those who do not know
you? What is that to you? For no other artisan cares for the opinion
of those who know not his art. "But they will be more hostile to me
for this reason." Why do you say "me"? Can any man injure your will,
or prevent you from using in a natural way the appearances which are
presented to you, "In no way can he." Why, then, are still disturbed
and why do you choose to show yourself afraid? And why do you not come
forth and proclaim that you are at peace with all men whatever they
may do, and laugh at those chiefly who think that they can harm you?
"These slaves," you can say, "know not either who I am nor where
lies my good or my evil, because they have no access to the things
which are mine."

  In this way, also, those who occupy a strong city mock the
besiegers; "What trouble these men are now taking for nothing: our
wall is secure, we have food for a very long time, and all other
resources." These are the things which make a city strong and
impregnable: but nothing else than his opinions makes a man's soul
impregnable. For what wall is so strong, or what body is so hard, or
what possession is so safe, or what honour so free from assault? All
things everywhere are perishable, easily taken by assault, and, if any
man in any way is attached to them, he must be disturbed, expect
what is bad, he must fear, lament, find his desires disappointed,
and fall into things which he would avoid. Then do we not choose to
make secure the only means of safety which are offered to us, and do
we not choose to withdraw ourselves from that which is perishable
and servile and to labour at the things, which are imperishable and by
nature free; and do we not remember that no man either hurts another
or does good to another, but that a man's opinion about each thing
is that which hurts him, is that which overturns him; this is
fighting, this is civil discord, this is war? That which made Eteocles
and Polynices enemies was nothing else than this opinion which they
had about royal power, their opinion about exile, that the one is
the extreme of evils, the other the greatest good. Now this is the
nature of every man to seek the good, to avoid the bad; to consider
him who deprives us of the one and involves us in the other an enemy
and treacherous, even if he be a brother, or a son or a father. For
nothing is more akin to us than the good: therefore if these things
are good and evil, neither is a father a friend to sons, nor a brother
to a brother, but all the world is everywhere full of enemies,
treacherous men, and sycophants. But if the will, being what it
ought to be, is the only good; and if the will, being such as it ought
not to be, is the only evil, where is there any strife, where is there
reviling? about what? about the things which do not concern us? and
strife with whom? with the ignorant, the unhappy, with those who are
deceived about the chief things?

  Remembering this Socrates managed his own house and endured a very
ill-tempered wife and a foolish son. For in what did she show her
bad temper? In pouring water on his head as much as she liked, and
in trampling on the cake. And what is this to me, if I think that
these things are nothing to me? But this is my business; and neither
tyrant shall check my will nor a master; nor shall the many check me
who am only one, nor shall the stronger check me who am the weaker;
for this power of being free from check is given by God to every
man. For these opinions make love in a house, concord in a state,
among nations peace, and gratitude to God; they make a man in all
things cheerful in externals as about things which belong to others,
as about things which are of no value. We indeed are able to write and
to read these things, and to praise them when they are read, but we do
not even come near to being convinced of them. Therefore what is
said of the Lacedaemonians, "Lions at home, but in Ephesus foxes,"
will fit in our case also, "Lions in the school, but out of it foxes."

  CHAPTER 6

  Against those who lament over being pitied

  "I am grieved," a man says, "at being pitied." Whether, then, is the
fact of your being pitied a thing which concerns you or those who pity
you? Well, is it in your power to stop this pity? "It is in my
power, if I show them that I do not require pity." And whether,
then, are you in the condition of not deserving pity, or are you not
in that condition? "I think I am not: but these persons do not pity me
for the things for which, if they ought to pity me, it would be
proper, I mean, for my faults; but they pity me for my poverty, for
not possessing honourable offices, for diseases and deaths and other
such things." Whether, then, are you prepared to convince the many
that not one of these things is an evil, but that it is possible for a
man who is poor and has no office and enjoys no honour to be happy; or
to show yourself to them as rich and in power? For the second of these
things belong, to a man who is boastful, silly and good for nothing.
And consider by what means the pretense must be supported. It will
be necessary for you to hire slaves and to possess a few silver
vessels, and to exhibit them in public, if it is possible, though they
are often the same, and to attempt to conceal the fact that they are
the same, and to have splendid garments, and all other things for
display, and to show that you are a man honoured by the great, and
to try to sup at their houses, or to be supposed to sup there, and
as to your person to employ some mean arts, that you may appear to
be more handsome and nobler than you are. These things you must
contrive, if you choose to go by the second path in order not to be
pitied. But the first way is both impracticable and long, to attempt
the very thing which Zeus has not been able to do, to convince all men
what things are good and bad. Is this power given to you? This only is
given to you, to convince yourself; and you have not convinced
yourself. Then I ask you, do you attempt to persuade other men? and
who has lived so long with you as you with yourself? and who has so
much power of convincing you as you have of convincing yourself; and
who is better disposed and nearer to you than you are to yourself?
How, then, have you not convinced yourself in order to learn? At
present are not things upside down? Is this what you have been earnest
about doing, to learn to be free from grief and free from disturbance,
and not to be humbled, and to be free? Have you not heard, then,
that there is only one way which leads to this end, to give up the
things which do not depend on the will, to withdraw from them, and
to admit that they belong to others? For another man, then, to have an
opinion about you, of what kind is it? "It is a thing independent of
the will." Then is it nothing to you? "It is nothing." When, then, you
are still vexed at this and disturbed, do you think that you are
convinced about good and evil?

  Will you not, then, letting others alone, be to yourself both
scholar and teacher? "The rest of mankind will look after this,
whether it is to their interest to be and to pass their lives in a
state contrary to nature: but to me no man is nearer than myself.
What, then, is the meaning of this, that I have listened to the
words of the philosophers and I assent to them, but in fact I am no
way made easier? Am I so stupid? And yet, in all other things such
as I have chosen, I have not been found very stupid; but I learned
letters quickly, and to wrestle, and geometry, and to resolve
syllogisms. Has not, then, reason convinced me? and indeed no other
things have I from the beginning so approved and chosen: and now I
read about these things, hear about them, write about them; I have
so far discovered no reason stronger than this. In what, then, am I
deficient? Have the contrary opinions not been eradicated from me?
Have the notions themselves not been exercised nor used to be
applied to action, but as armour are laid aside and rusted and
cannot fit me? And yet neither in the exercises of the palaestra,
nor in writing or reading am I satisfied with learning, but I turn
up and down the syllogisms which are proposed, and I make others,
and sophistical syllogisms also. But the necessary theorems, by
proceeding from which a man can become free from grief, fear,
passions, hindrance, and a free man, these I do not exercise myself in
nor do I practice in these the proper practice. Then I care about what
others will say of me, whether I shall appear to them worth notice,
whether I shall appear happy."

  Wretched man, will you not see what you. are saying about
yourself? What do you appear to yourself to be? in your opinions, in
your desires, in your aversions from things, in your movements, in
your preparation, in your designs, and in other acts suitable to a
man? But do you trouble yourself about this, whether others pity
you? "Yes, but I am pitied not as I ought to be." Are you then
pained at this? and is he who is pained, an object of pity? "Yes."
How, then, are you pitied not as you ought to be? For by the very
act that you feel about being pitied, you make yourself deserving of
pity. What then says Antisthenes? Have you not heard? "It is a royal
thing, O Cyrus, to do right and to be ill-spoken of." My head is
sound, and all think that I have the headache. What do I care for
that? I am free from fever, and people sympathize with me as if I
had a fever: "Poor man, for so long a time you have not ceased to have
fever." I also say with a sorrowful countenance: "In truth it is now a
long time that I have been ill." "What will happen then?" "As God
may please": and at the same time I secretly laugh at those who are
pitying me. What, then, hinders the same being done in this case also?
I am poor, but I have a right opinion about poverty. Why, then, do I
care if they pity me for my poverty? I am not in power; but others
are: and I have the opinion which I ought to have about having and not
having power. Let them look to it who pity me; but I am neither hungry
nor thirsty nor do I suffer cold; but because they are hungry or
thirsty they think that I too am. What, then, shall I do for them?
Shall I go about and proclaim and say: "Be not mistaken, men, I am
very well, I do not trouble myself about poverty, nor want of power,
nor in a word about anything else than right opinions. These I have
free from restraint, I care for nothing at all." What foolish talk
is this? How do I possess right opinions when I am not content with
being what I am, but am uneasy about what I am supposed to be?

  "But," you say, "others will get more and be preferred to me." What,
then, is more reasonable than for those who have laboured about
anything to have more in that thing in which they have laboured?
They have laboured for power, you have laboured about opinions; and
they have laboured for wealth, you for the proper use of
appearances. See if they have more than you in this about which you
have laboured, and which they neglect; if they assent better than
you with respect to the natural rules of things; if they are less
disappointed than you in their desires; if they fall less into
things which they would avoid than you do; if in their intentions,
if in the things which they propose to themselves, if in their
purposes, if in their motions toward an object they take a better aim;
if they better observe a proper behavior, as men, as sons, as parents,
and so on as to the other names by which we express the relations of
life. But if they exercise power, and you do not, will you not
choose to tell yourself the truth, that you do nothing for the sake of
this, and they do all? But it is most unreasonable that he who looks
after anything should obtain less than he who does not look after it.

  "Not so: but since I care about right opinions, it more reasonable
for me to have power." Yes in the matter about which you do care, in
opinions. But in a matter in which they have cared more than you, give
way to them. The case is just the same as if, because you have right
opinions, you thought that in using the bow you should hit the mark
better than an archer, and in working in metal you should succeed
better than a smith. Give up, then, your earnestness about opinions
and employ yourself about the things which you wish to acquire; and
then lament, if you do not succeed; for you deserve to lament. But now
you say that you are occupied with other things, that you are
looking after other things; but the many say this truly, that one
act has no community with another. He who has risen in the morning
seeks whom he shall salute, to whom he shall say something
agreeable, to whom he shall send a present, how he shall please the
dancing man, how by bad behavior to one he may please another. When he
prays, he prays about these things; when he sacrifices, he
sacrifices for these things: the saying of Pythagoras

     Let sleep not come upon thy languid eyes

he transfers to these things. "Where have I failed in the matters
pertaining to flattery?" "What have I done?" Anything like a free man,
anything like a noble-minded man? And if he finds anything of the
kind, he blames and accuses himself: "Why did you say this? Was it not
in your power to lie? Even the philosophers say that nothing hinders
us from telling a lie." But do you, if indeed you have cared about
nothing else except the proper use of appearances, as soon as you have
risen in the morning reflect, "What do I want in order to be free from
passion, and free from perturbation? What am I? Am I a poor body, a
piece of property, a thing of which something is said? I am none of
these. But what am I? I am a rational animal. What then is required of
me?" Reflect on your acts. "Where have I omitted the things which
conduce to happiness? What have I done which is either unfriendly or
unsocial? what have I not done as to these things which I ought to
have done?"

  So great, then, being, the difference in desires, actions, wishes,
would you still have the same share with others in those things
about which you have not laboured, and they have laboured? Then are
you surprised if they pity you, and are you vexed? But they are not
vexed if you pity them. Why? Because they are convinced that they have
that which is good, and you are not convinced. For this reason you are
not satisfied with your own, but you desire that which they have:
but they are satisfied with their own, and do not desire what you
have: since, if you were really convinced that with respect to what is
good, it is you who are the possessor of it and that they have
missed it, you would not even have thought of what they say about you.

  CHAPTER 7

  On freedom from fear

  What makes the tyrant formidable? "The guards," you say, "and
their swords, and the men of the bedchamber and those who exclude them
who would enter." Why, then, if you bring a boy to the tyrant when
he is with his guards, is he not afraid; or is it because the child
does not understand these things? If, then, any man does understand
what guards are and that they have swords, and comes to the tyrant for
this very purpose because he wishes to die on account of some
circumstance and seeks to die easily by the hand of another, is he
afraid of the guards? "No, for he wishes for the thing which makes the
guards formidable." If, then, neither any man wishing to die nor to
live by all means, but only as it may be permitted, approaches the
tyrant, what hinders him from approaching the tyrant without fear?
"Nothing." If, then, a man has the same opinion about his property
as the man whom I have instanced has about his body; and also about
his children and his wife, and in a word is so affected by some
madness or despair that he cares not whether he possesses them or not,
but like children who are playing, with shells care about the play,
but do not trouble themselves about the shells, so he too has set no
value on the materials, but values the pleasure that he has with
them and the occupation, what tyrant is then formidable to him or what
guards or what swords?

  Then through madness is it possible for a man to be so disposed
toward these things, and the Galilaens through habit, and is it
possible that no man can learn from reason and from demonstration that
God has made all the things in the universe and the universe itself
completely free from hindrance and perfect, and the parts of it for
the use of the whole? All other animals indeed are incapable of
comprehending the administration of it; but the rational animal,
man, has faculties for the consideration of all these and for
understanding that it is a part, and what kind of a part it is, and
that it is right for the parts to be subordinate to the whole. And
besides this being naturally noble, magnanimous and free, man sees
that of the things which surround him some are free from hindrance and
in his power, and the other things are subject to hindrance and in the
power of others; that the things which are free from hindrance are
in the power of the will; and those which are subject to hinderance
are the things which are not in the power of the will. And, for this
reason, if he thinks that his good and his interest be in these things
only which are free from hindrance and in his own power, he will be
free, prosperous, happy, free from harm, magnanimous pious, thankful
to God for all things; in no matter finding fault with any of the
things which have not been put in his power, nor blaming any of
them. But if he thinks that his good and his interest are in externals
and in things which are not in the power of his will, he must of
necessity be hindered, be impeded, be a slave to those who have the
power over things which he admires and fears; and he must of necessity
be impious because he thinks that he is harmed by God, and he must
be unjust because he always claims more than belongs to him; and he
must of necessity be abject and mean.

  What hinders a man, who has clearly separated these things, from
living with a light heart and bearing easily the reins, quietly
expecting everything which can happen, and enduring that which has
already happened? "Would you have me to bear poverty?" Come and you
will know what poverty is when it has found one who can act well the
part of a poor man. "Would you have me to possess power?" Let me
have power, and also the trouble of it. "Well, banishment?" Wherever I
shall go, there it will be well with me; for here also where I am,
it was not because of the place that it was well with me, but
because of my opinions which I shall carry off with me: for neither
can any man deprive me of them; but my opinions alone are mine and
they cannot he taken from me, and I am satisfied while I have them,
wherever I may be and whatever I am doing. "But now it is time to
die." Why do you say "to die"? Make no tragedy show of the thing,
but speak of it as it is: it is now time for the matter to be resolved
into the things out of which it was composed. And what is the
formidable thing here? what is going to perish of the things which are
in the universe? what new thing or wondrous is going to happen? Is
it for this reason that a tyrant is formidable? Is it for this
reason that the guards appear to have swords which are large and
sharp? Say this to others; but I have considered about all these
thins; no man has power over me. I have been made free; I know His
commands, no man can now lead me as a slave. I have a proper person to
assert my freedom; I have proper judges. Are you not the master of
my body? What, then, is that to me? Are you not the master of my
property? What, then, is that to me? Are you not the master of my
exile or of my chains? Well, from all these things and all the poor
body itself I depart at your bidding, when you please. Make trial of
your power, and you will know how far it reaches.

  Whom then can I still fear? Those who are over the bedchamber?
Lest they should do, what? Shut me out? If they find that I wish to
enter, let them shut me out. "Why, then, do you go to the doors?"
Because I think it befits me, while the play lasts, to join in it.
"How, then, are you not shut out?" Because, unless some one allows
me to go in, I do not choose to ,o in, but am always content with that
I which happens; for I think that what God chooses is better than what
I choose. I will attach myself as a minister and follower to Him; I
have the same movements as He has, I have the same desires; in a word,
I have the same will. There is no shutting out for me, but for those
who would force their in. Why, then, do not I force my way in? Because
I know that nothing good is distributed within to those who enter. But
when I hear any man called fortunate because he is honoured by Caesar,
I say, "What does he happen to get?" A province. Does he also obtain
an opinion such as he ought? The office of a Prefect. Does he also
obtain the power of using his office well? Why do I still strive to
enter? A man scatters dried figs and nuts: the children seize them and
fight with one another; men do not, for they think them to be a
small matter. But if a man should throw about shells, even the
children do not seize them. Provinces are distributed: let children
look to that. Money is distributed: let children look to that.
Praetorships, consulships are distributed: let children scramble for
them, let them be shut out, beaten, kiss the hands of the giver, of
the slaves: but to me these are only dried figs and nuts. What then?
If you fail to get them, while Caesar is scattering them about, do not
be troubled: if a dried fig come into your lap, take it and eat it;
for so far you may value even a fig. But if I shall stoop down and
turn another over, or be turned over by another, and shall flatter
those who have got into chamber, neither is a dried fig worth the
trouble, nor anything else of the things which are not good, which the
philosophers have persuaded me not to think good.

  Show me the swords of the guards. "See how big they are, and how
sharp." What, then, do these big and sharp swords do? "They kill." And
what does a fever do? "Nothing else." And what else a tile? "Nothing
else." Would you then have me to wonder at these things and worship
them, and go about as the slave of all of them? I hope that this
will not happen: but when I have once learned that everything which
has come into existence must also go out of it, that the universe
may not stand still nor be impeded, I no longer consider it any
difference whether a fever shall do it, or a tile, or a soldier. But
if a man must make a comparison between these things, I know that
the soldier will do it with less trouble, and quicker. When, then, I
neither fear anything which a tyrant can do to me, nor desire anything
which he can give, why do I still look on with wonder? Why am I
still confounded? Why do I fear the guards? Why am I pleased if he
speaks to me in a friendly way, and receives me, and why do I tell
others how he spoke to me? Is he a Socrates, is he a Diogenes that his
praise should be a proof of what I am? Have I been eager to imitate
his morals? But I keep up the play and go to him, and serve him so
long as he does not bid me to do anything foolish or unreasonable. But
if he says to me, "Go and bring Leon of Salamis," I say to him,
"Seek another, for I am no longer playing." "Lead him away." I follow;
that is part of the play. "But your head will be taken off." Does
the tyrant's head always remain where it is, and the heads of you
who obey him? "But you will be cast out unburied." If the corpse is I,
I shall be cast out; but if I am different from the corpse, speak more
properly according as the fact is, and do not think of frightening me.
These things are formidable to children and fools. But if any man
has once entered a philosopher's school and knows not what he is, he
deserves to be full of fear and to flatter those whom afterward he
used to flatter; if he has not yet learned that he is not flesh nor
bones nor sinews, but he is that which makes use of these parts of the
body and governs them and follows the appearances of things.

  "Yes, but this talk makes us despise the laws." And what kind of
talk makes men more obedient to the laws who employ such talk? And the
things which are in the power of a fool are not law. And yet see how
this talk makes us disposed as we ought to be even to these men; since
it teaches us to claim in opposition to them none of the things in
which they are able to surpass us. This talk teaches us, as to the
body, to give it up, as to property, to give that up also, as to
children, parents, brothers, to retire from these, to give up all;
It only makes an exception of the opinions, which even Zeus has willed
to be the select property of every man. What transgression of the laws
is there here, what folly? Where you are superior and stronger,
there I give way to you: on the other hand, where I am superior, do
you yield to me; for I have studied this, and you have not. It is your
study to live in houses with floors formed of various stones, how your
slaves and dependents shall serve you, how you shall wear fine
clothing, have many hunting men, lute players, and tragic actors. Do I
claim any of these? have you made any study of opinions and of your
own rational faculty? Do you know of what parts it is composed, how
they are brought together, how they are connected, what powers it has,
and of what kind? Why then are you vexed, if another, who has made
it his study, has the advantage over you in these things? "But these
things are the greatest." And who hinders you from being employed
about these things and looking after them? And who has a better
stock of books, of leisure, of persons to aid you? Only turn your mind
at last to these things, attend, if it be only a short time, to your
own ruling faculty: consider what this is that you possess, and whence
it came, this which uses all others, and tries them, and selects and
rejects. But so long as you employ yourself about externals you will
possess them as no man else does; but you will have this such as you
choose to have it, sordid and neglected.

  CHAPTER 8

  Against those who hastily rush into the use of the philosophic
dress

  Never praise nor blame a man because of the things which are common,
and do not ascribe to him any skill or want of skill; and thus you
will be free from rashness and from malevolence. "This man bathes very
quickly." Does he then do wrong? Certainly not. But what does he do?
He bathes very quickly. Are all things then done well? By no means:
but the acts which proceed from right opinions are done well; and
those which proceed from bad opinions are done ill. But do you,
until you know the opinion from which a man does each thing, neither
praise nor blame the act. But the opinion is not easily discovered
from the external things. "This man is a carpenter." Why? "Because
he uses an ax." What, then, is this to the matter? "This man is a
musician because he sings." And what does that signify? "This man is a
philosopher. Because he wears a cloak and long hair." And what does
a juggler wear? For this reason if a man sees any philosopher acting
indecently, immediately he says, "See what the philosopher is
doing"; but he ought because of the man's indecent behavior rather
to say that he is not a philosopher. For if this is the preconceived
notion of a philosopher and what he professes, to wear a cloak and
long hair, men would say well; but if what he professes is this
rather, to keep himself free from faults, why do we not rather,
because he does not make good his professions, take from him the
name of philosopher? For so we do in the case of all other arts.
When a man sees another handling an ax badly, he does not say, "What
is the use of the carpenter's art? See how badly carpenters do their
work"; but he says just the contrary, "This man is not a carpenter,
for he uses an ax badly." In the same way if a man hears another
singing badly, he does not say, "See how musicians sing"; but
rather, "This man is not a musician." But it is in the matter of
philosophy only that people do this. When they see a man acting
contrary to the profession of a philosopher, they do not take away his
title, but they assume him to be a philosopher, and from his acts
deriving the fact that he is behaving indecently they conclude that
there is no use in philosophy.

  What, then, is the reason of this? Because we attach value to the
notion of a carpenter, and to that of a musician, and to the notion of
other artisans in like manner, but not to that of a philosopher, and
we judge from externals only that it is a thing confused and ill
defined. And what other kind of art has a name from the dress and
the hair; and has not theorems and a material and an end? What,
then, is the material of the philosopher? Is it a cloak? No, but
reason. What is his end? is it to wear a cloak? No, but to possess the
reason in a right state. Of what kind are his theorems? Are they those
about the way in which the beard becomes great or the hair long? No,
but rather what Zeno says, to know the elements of reason, what kind
of a thing each of them is, and how they are fitted to one another,
and what things are consequent upon them. Will you not, then, see
first if he does what he professes when he acts in an unbecoming
manner, and then blame his study? But now when you yourself are acting
in a sober way, you say in consequence of what he seems to you to be
doing wrong, "Look at the philosopher," as if it were proper to call
by the name of philosopher one who does these things; and further,
"This is the conduct of a philosopher." But you do not say, "Look at
the carpenter," when you know that a carpenter is an adulterer or
you see him to be a glutton; nor do you say, "See the musician."
Thus to a certain degree even you perceive the profession of a
philosopher, but you fall away from the notion, and you are confused
through want of care.

  But even the philosophers themselves as they are called pursue the
thing by beginning with things which are common to them and others: as
soon as they have assumed a cloak and grown a beard, they say, "I am a
philosopher." But no man will say, "I am a musician," if he has bought
a plectrum and a lute: nor will he say, "I am a smith," if he has
put on a cap and apron. But the dress is fitted to the art; and they
take their name from the art, and not from the dress. For this
reason Euphrates used to say well, "A long time I strove to be a
philosopher without people knowing it; and this," he said, "was useful
to me: for first I knew that when I did anything well, I did not do it
for the sake of the spectators, but for the sake of myself: I ate well
for the sake of myself; I had my countenance well composed and my
walk: all for myself and for God. Then, as I struggled alone, so I
alone also was in danger: in no respect through me, if I did
anything base or unbecoming, was philosophy endangered; nor did I
injure the many by doing anything wrong as a philosopher. For this
reason those who did not know my purpose used to wonder how it was
that, while I conversed and lived altogether with all philosophers,
I was not a philosopher myself. And what was the harm for me to be
known to be a philosopher by my acts and not by outward marks?" See
how I eat, how I drink, how I sleep, how I bear and forbear, how I
co-operate, how I employ desire, how I employ aversion, how I maintain
the relations, those which are natural or those which are acquired,
how free from confusion, how free from hindrance. Judge of me from
this, if you can. But if you are so deaf and blind that you cannot
conceive even Hephaestus to be a good smith, unless you see the cap on
his head, what is the harm in not being recognized by so foolish a
judge?

  So Socrates was not known to be a philosopher by most persons; and
they used to come to him and ask to be introduced to philosophers. Was
he vexed then as we are, and did he say, "And do you not think that
I am a philosopher?" No, but he would take them and introduce them,
being satisfied with one thing, with being a philosopher; and being
pleased also with not being thought to be a philosopher, he was not
annoyed: for he thought of his own occupation. What is the work of
an honourable and good man? To have many pupils? By no means. They
will look to this matter who are earnest about it. But was it his
business to examine carefully difficult theorems? Others will look
after these matters also. In what, then, was he, and who was he and
whom did he wish to be? He was in that wherein there was hurt and
advantage. "If any man can damage me," he says, "I am doing nothing:
if I am waiting for another man to do me good, I am nothing. If I
anguish for anything, and it does not happen, I am unfortunate." To
such a contest he invited every man, and I do not think that he
would have declined the contest with any one. What do you suppose? was
it by proclaiming and saying, "I am such a man?" Far from it, but by
being such a man. For further, this is the character of a fool and a
boaster to say, "I am free from passions and disturbance: do not be
ignorant, my friends, that while you are uneasy and disturbed about
things of no value, I alone am free from all perturbation." So is it
not enough for you to feel no pain, unless you make this proclamation:
"Come together all who are suffering gout, pains in the head, fever,
ye who are lame, blind, and observe that I am sound from every
ailment." This is empty and disagreeable to hear, unless like
Aesculapius you are able to show immediately by what kind of treatment
they also shall be immediately free from disease, and unless you
show your own health as an example.

  For such is the Cynic who is honoured with the sceptre and the
diadem of Zeus, and says, "That you may see, O men, that you seek
happiness and tranquillity not where it is, but where it is not,
behold I am sent to you by God as an example. I who have neither
property nor house, nor wife nor children, nor even a bed, nor coat
nor household utensil; and see how healthy I am: try me, and if you
see that I am free from perturbations, hear the remedies and how I
have been cured." This is both philanthropic and noble. But see
whose work it is, the work of Zeus, or of him whom He may judge worthy
of this service, that he may never exhibit anything to the many, by
which he shall make of no effect his own testimony, whereby he gives
testimony to virtue, and bears evidence against external things:

     His beauteous face pales his cheeks

     He wipes a tear.

And not this only, but he neither desires nor seeks anything, nor
man nor place nor amusement, as children seek the vintage or holidays;
always fortified by modesty as others are fortified by walls and doors
and doorkeepers.

  But now, being only moved to philosophy, as those who have a bad
stomach are moved to some kinds of food which they soon loathe,
straightway toward the sceptre and to the royal power. They let the
hair grow, they assume the cloak, they show the shoulder bare, they
quarrel with those whom they meet; and if they see a man in a thick
winter coat, they quarrel with him. Man, first exercise yourself in
winter weather: see your movements that they are not those of a man
with a bad stomach or those of a longing woman. First strive that it
be not known what you are: be a philosopher to yourself a short
time. Fruit grows thus: the seed must be buried for some time, hid,
grow slowly in order that it may come to perfection. But if it
produces the ear before the jointed stem, it is imperfect, a produce
of the garden of Adonis. Such a poor plant are you also: you have
blossomed too soon; the cold weather will scorch you up. See what
the husbandmen say about seeds when there is warm weather too early.
They are afraid lest the seeds should be too luxuriant, and then a
single frost should lay hold of them and show that they are too
forward. Do you also consider, my man: you have shot out too soon, you
have hurried toward a little fame before the proper season: you
think that you are something, a fool among fools: you will be caught
by the frost, and rather you have been frost-bitten in the root below,
but your upper parts still blossom a little, and for this reason you
think that you are still alive and flourishing. Allow us to ripen in
the natural way: why do you bare us? why do you force us? we are not
yet able to bear the air. Let the root grow, then acquire the first
joint, then the second, and then the third: in this way, then, the
fruit will naturally force itself out, even if I do not choose. For
who that is pregnant and I filled with such great principles does
not also perceive his own powers and move toward the corresponding
acts? A bull is not ignorant of his own nature and his powers, when
a wild beast shows itself, nor does he wait for one to urge him on;
nor a dog when he sees a wild animal. But if I have the powers of a
good man, shall I wait for you to prepare me for my own acts? At
present I have them not, believe me. Why then do you wish me to be
withered up before the time, as you have been withered up?

  CHAPTER 9

  To a person who had been changed to a character of shamelessness

  When you see another man in the possession of power, set against
this the fact that you have not the want of power; when you see
another rich, see what you possess in place of riches: for if you
possess nothing in place of them, you are miserable; but if you have
not the want of riches, know that you possess more than this man
possesses and what is worth much more. Another man possesses a
handsome woman: you have the satisfaction of not desiring a handsome
wife. Do these things appear to you to he small? And how much would
these persons give, these very men who are rich and in possession of
power, and live with handsome women, to be able to despise riches
and power and these very women whom they love and enjoy? Do you not
know, then, what is the thirst of a man who has a fever? He
possesses that which is in no degree like the thirst of a man who is
in health: for the man who is in health ceases to be thirsty after
he has drunk; but the sick man, being pleased for a short time, has
a nausea; he converts the drink into bile, vomits, is griped, and more
thirsty. It is such a thing to have desire of riches and to possess
riches, desire of power and to possess power, desire of a beautiful
woman and to sleep with her: to this is added jealousy, fear of
being deprived of the thing which you love, indecent words, indecent
thoughts, unseemly acts.

  "And what do I lose?" you will say. My man, you were modest, and you
are so no longer. Have you lost nothing? In place of Chrysippus and
Zeno you read Aristides and Evenus; have you lost nothing? In place of
Socrates and Diogenes, you admire him who is able to corrupt and
seduce most women. You wish to appear handsome and try to make
yourself so, though you are not. You like to display splendid
clothes that you may attract women; and if you find any fine oil,
yon imagine that you are happy. But formerly you did not think of
any such thing, but only where there should be decent talk, a worthy
man, and a generous conception. Therefore you slept like a man, walked
forth like a man, wore a manly dress, and used to talk in a way
becoming a good man; then do you say to me, "I have lost nothing?"
So do men lose nothing more than coin? Is not modesty lost? Is not
decent behavior lost? is it that he who has lost these things has
sustained no loss? Perhaps you think that not one of these things is a
loss. But there was a time when you reckoned this the only loss and
damage, and you were anxious that no man should disturb you from these
words and actions.

  Observe, you are disturbed from these good words and actions by
nobody but by yourself. Fight with yourself, restore yourself to
decency, to modesty, to liberty. If any man ever told you this about
me, that a person forces me to be an adulterer, to wear such a dress
as yours, to perfume myself with oils, would you not have gone and
with your own hand have killed the man who thus calumniated me? Now
will you not help yourself? and how much easier is this help? There is
no need to kill any man, nor to put him in chains, nor to treat him
with contumely, nor to enter the Forum, but it is only necessary for
you to speak to yourself who will be the most easily persuaded, with
whom no man has more power of persuasion than yourself. First of
all, condemn what you are doing, and then, when you have condemned it,
do not despair of yourself, and be not in the condition of those men
of mean spirit, who, when they have once given in, surrender
themselves completely and are carried away as if by a torrent. But see
what the trainers of boys do. Has the boy fallen? "Rise," they say,
"wrestle again till you are made strong." Do you also do something
of the same kind: for be well assured that nothing is more tractable
than the human soul. You must exercise the will, and the thing is
done, it is set right: as on the other hand, only fall a-nodding,
and the thing is lost: for from within comes ruin and from within
comes help. "Then what good do I gain?" And what greater good do you
seek than this? From a shameless man you will become a modest man,
from a disorderly you will become an orderly man, from a faithless you
will become a faithful man, from a man of unbridled habits a sober
man. If you seek anything more than this, go on doing what you are
doing: not even a God can now help you.

  CHAPTER 10

  What things we ought to despise, and what things we ought to value

  The difficulties of all men are about external things, their
helplessness is about externals. "What shall I do, how will it be, how
will it turn out, will this happen, will that?" All these are the
words of those who are turning themselves to things which are not
within the power of the will. For who says, "How shall I not assent to
that which is false? how shall I not turn away from the truth?" If a
man be of such a good disposition as to be anxious about these things,
I will remind him of this: "Why are you anxious? The thing is in
your own power: be assured: do not be precipitate in assenting
before you apply the natural rule." On the other side, if a man is
anxious about desire, lest it fail in its purpose and miss its end,
and with respect to the avoidance of things, lest he should fall
into that which he would avoid, I will first kiss him, because he
throws away the things about which others are in a flutter, and
their fears, and employs his thoughts about his own affairs and his
own condition. Then I shall say to him: "If you do not choose to
desire that which you will fall to obtain nor to attempt to avoid that
into which you will fall, desire nothing which belongs to others,
nor try to avoid any of the things which are not in your power. If you
do not observe this rule, you must of necessity fall in your desires
and fall into that which you would avoid. What is the difficulty here?
where is there room for the words, 'How will it be?' and 'How will
it turn out?' and, 'Will this happen or that?'

  Now is not that which will happen independent of the will? "Yes."
And the nature of good and of evil, is it not in the things which
are within the power of the will? "Yes." Is it in your power, then, to
treat according to nature everything which happens? Can any person
hinder you? "No man." No longer then say to me, "How will it be?"
For however it may be, you will dispose of it well, and the result
to you will be a fortunate one. What would Hercules have been if he
had said, "How shall a great lion not appear to me, or a great boar,
or savage men?" And what do you care for that? If a great boar appear,
you will fight a greater fight: if bad men appear, you relieve the
earth of the bad. "Suppose, then, that I may lose my life in this
way." You will die a good man, doing a noble act. For since we must
certainly die, of necessity a man must be found doing something,
either following the employment of a husbandman, or digging, or
trading, or serving in a consulship or suffering from indigestion or
from diarrhea. What then do you wish to be doing, when you are found
by death? I for my part would wish to be found doing something which
belongs to a man, beneficent, suitable to the general interest, noble.
But if I cannot be found doing things so great, I would be found doing
at least that which I cannot be hindered from doing, that which is
permitted me to do, correcting, myself, cultivating the faculty
which makes use of appearances, labouring at freedom from the affects,
rendering to the relations of life their due; if I succeed so far,
also touching on the third topic, safety in the forming judgements
about things. If death surprises me when I am busy about these things,
it is enough for me if I can stretch out my hands to God and say:

  "The means which I have received from Thee for seeing Thy
administration and following it, I have not neglected: I have not
dishonoured Thee by my acts: see how I have used my perceptions, see
how I have used my preconceptions: have I ever blamed Thee? have I
been discontented with anything that happens, or wished it to be
otherwise? have I wished to transgress the relations? That Thou hast
given me life, I thank Thee for what Thou has given me: so long as I
have used the things which are Thine, I am content; take them back and
place them wherever Thou mayest choose; for Thine were all things,
Thou gavest them to me." Is it not enough to depart in this state of
mind, and what life is better and more becoming than that of a man who
is in this state of mind? and what end is more happy?

  But that this may be done, a man must receive no small things, nor
are the things small which he must lose. You cannot both wish to be
a consul and to have these things, and to be eager to have lands and
these things also; and to be solicitous about slaves and about
yourself. But if you wish for anything which belongs to another,
that which is your own is lost. This is the nature of the thing:
nothing is given or had for nothing. And where is the wonder? If you
wish to be a consul, you must keep awake, run about, kiss hands, waste
yourself with exhaustion at other men's doors, say and do many
things unworthy of a free man, send gifts to many, daily presents to
some. And what is the thing that is got? Twelve bundles of rods, to
sit three or four times on the tribunal, to exhibit the games in the
Circus and to give suppers in small baskets. Or, if you do not agree
about this, let some one show me what there is besides these things.
In order, then, to secure freedom from passions, tranquillity, to
sleep well when you do sleep, to be really awake when you are awake,
to fear nothing, to be anxious about nothing, will you spend nothing
and give no labour? But if anything belonging to you be lost while you
are thus busied, or be wasted badly, or another obtains what you ought
to have obtained, will you immediately be vexed at what has
happened? Will you not take into the account on the other side what
you receive and for what, how much for how much? Do you expect to have
for nothing things so great? And how can you? One work has no
community with another. You cannot have both external things after
bestowing care on them and your own ruling faculty: but if you would
have those, give up this. If you do not, you will have neither this
nor that, while you are drawn in different ways to both. The oil
will be spilled, the household vessels will perish: but I shall be
free from passions. There will be a fire when I am not present, and
the books will be destroyed: but I shall treat appearances according
to nature. "Well; but I shall have nothing to eat." If I am so
unlucky, death is a harbour; and death is the harbour for all; this is
the place of refuge; and for this reason not one of the things in life
is difficult: as soon as you choose, you are out of the house, and are
smoked no more. Why, then, are you anxious, why do you lose your sleep,
why do you not straightway, after considering wherein your good is and
your evil, say, "Both of them are in my power? Neither can any man
deprive me of the good, nor involve me in the bad against my will. Why
do I not throw myself down and snore? for all that I have is safe. As
to the things which belong to others, he will look to them who gets
them, as they may be given by Him who has the power. Who am I who wish
to have them in this way or in that? is a power ofselecting them given
to me? has any person made me the dispenser of them? Those things are
enough for me over which I have power: I ought to manage them as well
as I can: and all the rest, as the Master of them may choose."

  When a man has these things before his eyes, does he keep awake
and turn hither and thither? What would he have, or what does he
regret, Patroclus or Antilochus or Menelaus? For when did he suppose
that any of his friends was immortal, and when had he not before his
eyes that on the morrow or the day after he or his friend must die?
"Yes," he says, "but I thought that he would survive me and bring up
my son." You were a fool for that reason, and you were thinking of
what was uncertain. Why, then, do you not blame yourself, and sit
crying like girls? "But he used to set my food before me." Because
he was alive, you fool, but now he cannot: but Automedon will set it
before you, and if Automedon also dies, you will find another. But
if the pot, in which your meat was cooked, should be broken, must
you die of hunger, because you have not the pot which you are
accustomed to? Do you not send and buy a new pot? He says:

     "No greater ill could fall on me."

Why is this your ill? Do you, then, instead of removing it, blame your
mother for not foretelling it to you that you might continue
grieving from that time? What do you think? do you not suppose that
Homer wrote this that we may learn that those of noblest birth, the
strongest and the richest, the most handsome, when they have not the
opinions which they ought to have, are not prevented from being most
wretched and unfortunate?

  CHAPTER 11

  About Purity

  Some persons raise a question whether the social feeling is
contained in the nature of man; and yet I think that these same
persons would have no doubt that love of purity is certainly contained
in it, and that, if man is distinguished from other animals by
anything, he is distinguished by this. When, then, we see any other
animal cleaning itself, we are accustomed to speak of the act with
surprise, and to add that the animal is acting like a man: and, on the
other hand, if a man blames an animal for being dirty, straightway
as if we were making an excuse for it, we say that of course the
animal is not a human creature. So we suppose that there is
something superior in man, and that we first receive it from the Gods.
For since the Gods by their nature are pure and free from
corruption, so far as men approach them by reason, so far do they
cling to purity and to a love of purity. But since it is impossible
that man's nature can be altogether pure being mixed of such
materials, reason is applied, as far as it is possible, and reason
endeavours to make human nature love

  The first, then, and highest purity is that which is in the soul;
and we say the same of impurity. Now you could not discover the
impurity of the soul as you could discover that of the body: but as to
the soul, what else could you find in it than that which makes it
filthy in respect to the acts which are her own? Now the acts of the
soul are movement toward an object or movement from it, desire,
aversion, preparation, design, assent. What, then, is it which in
these acts makes the soul filthy and impure? Nothing else than her own
bad judgements. Consequently, the impurity of the soul is the soul's
bad opinions; and the purification of the soul is the planting in it
of proper opinions; and the soul is pure which has proper opinions,
for the soul alone in her own acts is free from perturbation and
pollution.

  Now we ought to work at something like this in the body also, as far
as we can. It was impossible for the defluxions of the nose not to run
when man has such a mixture in his body. For this reason, nature has
made hands and the nostrils themselves as channels for carrying off
the humours. If, then, a man sucks up the defluxions, I say that he is
not doing the act of a man. It was impossible for a man's feet not
to be made muddy and not be soiled at all when he passes through dirty
places. For this reason, nature has made water and hands. It was
impossible that some impurity should not remain in the teeth from
eating: for this reason, she says, wash the teeth. Why? In order
that you may be a man and not a wild beast or a hog. It was impossible
that from the sweat and the pressing of the clothes there should not
remain some impurity about the body which requires to be cleaned away.
For this reason water, oil, hands, towels, scrapers, nitre,
sometimes all other kinds of means are necessary for cleaning the
body. You do not act so: but the smith will take off the rust from the
iron, and be will have tools prepared for this purpose, and you
yourself wash the platter when you are going to eat, if you are not
completely impure and dirty: but will you not wash the body nor make
it clean? "Why?" he replies. I will tell you again; in the first
place, that you may do the acts of a man; then, that you may not be
disagreeable to those with whom you associate. You do something of
this kind even in this matter, and you do not perceive it: you think
that you deserve to stink. Let it be so: deserve to stink. Do you
think that also those who sit by you, those who recline at table
with you, that those who kiss you deserve the same? Either go into a
desert, where you deserve to go, or live by yourself, and smell
yourself. For it is just that you alone should enjoy your own
impurity. But when you are in a city, to behave so inconsiderately and
foolishly, to what character do you think that it belongs? If nature
had entrusted to you a horse, would you have overlooked and
neglected him? And now think that you have been intrusted with your
own body as with a horse; wash it, wipe it, take care that no man
turns away from it, that no one gets out of the way for it. But who
does not get out of the way of a dirty man, of a stinking man, of a
man whose skin is foul, more than he does out of the way of a man
who is daubed with muck? That smell is from without, it is put upon
him; but the other smell is from want of care, from within, and in a
manner from a body in putrefaction.

  "But Socrates washed himself seldom." Yes, but his body was clean
and fair: and it was so agreeable and sweet that tile most beautiful
and the most noble loved him, and desired to sit by him rather than by
the side of those who had the handsomest forms. It was in his power
neither to use the bath nor to wash himself, if he chose; and yet
the rare use of water had an effect. If you do not choose to wash with
warm water, wash with cold. But Aristophanes says:

     Those who are pale, unshod, 'tis those I mean.

For Aristophanes says of Socrates that he also walked the air and
stole clothes from the palaestra. But all who have written about
Socrates bear exactly the contrary evidence in his favour; they say
that he was pleasant not only to hear, but also to see. On the other
hand they write the same about Diogenes. For we ought not even by
the appearance of the body to deter the multitude from philosophy; but
as in other things, a philosopher should show himself cheerful and
tranquil, so also he should in the things that relate to the body:
"See, ye men, that I have nothing, that I want nothing: see how I am
without a house, and without a city, and an exile, if it happens to be
so, and without a hearth I live more free from trouble and more
happily than all of noble birth and than the rich. But look at my poor
body also and observe that it is not injured by my hard way of
living." But if a man says this to me, who has the appearance and face
of a condemned man, what God shall persuade me to approach philosophy,
if it makes men such persons? Far from it; I would not choose to do
so, even if I were going to become a wise man. I indeed would rather
that a young man, who is making his first movements toward philosophy,
should come to me with his hair carefully trimmed than with it dirty
and rough, for there is seen in him a certain notion of beauty and a
desire of that which is becoming; and where he supposes it to be,
there also he strives that it shall be. It is only necessary to show
him, and to say: "Young man, you seek beauty, and you do well: you
must know then that it grows in that part of you where you have the
rational faculty: seek it there where you have the movements toward
and the movements from things, where you have the desire toward, ind
the aversion from things: for this is what you have in yourself of a
superior kind; but the poor body is naturally only earth: why do you
labour about it to no purpose? if you shall learn nothing else, you
will learn from time that the body is nothing." But if a man comes
to me daubed with filth, dirty, with a mustache down to his knees,
what can I say to him, by what kind of resemblance can I lead him
on? For about what has he busied himself which resembles beauty,
that I may be able to change him and "Beauty is not in this, but in
that?" Would you have me to tell him, that beauty consists not in
being daubed with muck, but that it lies in the rational part? Has
he any desire of beauty? has he any form of it in his mind? Go and
talk to a hog, and tell him not to roll in the mud.

  For this reason the words of Xenocrates touched Polemon also;
since he was a lover of beauty, for he entered, having in him
certain incitements to love of beauty, but he looked for it in the
wrong place. For nature has not made even the animals dirty which live
with man. Does a horse ever wallow in the mud or a well-bred dog?
But the hog, and the dirty geese, and worms and spiders do, which
are banished furthest from human intercourse. Do you, then, being a
man, choose to be not as one of the animals which live with man, but
rather a worm, or a spider? Will you not wash yourself somewhere
some time in such manner as you choose? Will you not wash off the dirt
from your body? Will you not come clean that those with whom you
keep company may have pleasure in being with you? But do you go with
us even into the temples in such a state, where it is not permitted to
spit or blow the nose, being a heap of spittle and of snot?

  When then? does any man require you to ornament yourself? Far from
it; except to ornament that which we really are by nature, the
rational faculty, the opinions, the actions; but as to the body only
so far as purity, only so far as not to give offense. But if you are
told that you ought not to wear garments dyed with purple, go and daub
your cloak with muck or tear it. "But how shall I have a neat
cloak?" Man, you have water; wash it. Here is a youth worthy of
being loved, here is an old man worthy of loving and being loved in
return, a fit person for a man to intrust to him a son's
instruction, to whom daughters and young men shall come, if
opportunity shall so happen, that the teacher shall deliver his
lessons to them on a dunghill. Let this not be so: every deviation
comes from something which is in man's nature; but this is near
being something not in man's nature.

  CHAPTER 12

  On attention

  When you have remitted your attention for a short time, do not
imagine this, that you will recover it when you choose; but let but
let this thought be present to you, that in consequence of the fault
committed to-day your affairs must be in a worse condition for all
that follows. For first, and what causes most trouble, a habit of
not attending is formed in you; then a habit of deferring your
attention. And continually from time to time you drive away, by
deferring it, the happiness of life, proper behavior, the being and
living conformably to nature. If, then, the procrastination of
attention is profitable, the complete omission of attention is more
profitable; but if it is not profitable, why do you not maintain
your attention constant? "To-day I choose to play." Well then, ought
you not to play with attention? "I choose to sing." What, then,
hinders you from doing so with attention? Is there any part of life
excepted, to which attention does not extend? For will you do it worse
by using attention, and better by not attending at all? And what
else of things in life is done better by those who do not use
attention? Does he who works in wood work better by not attending to
it? Does the captain of a ship manage it better by not attending?
and is any of the smaller acts done better by inattention? Do you
not see that, when you have let your mind loose, it is no longer in
your power to recall it, either to propriety, or to modesty, or to
moderation: but you do everything that comes into your mind in
obedience to your inclinations?

  To what things then ought I to attend? First to those general
(principles) and to have them in readiness, and without them not to
sleep, not to rise, not to drink, not to eat, not to converse with
men; that no man is master of another man's will, but that in the will
alone is the good and the bad. No man, then, has the power either to
procure for me any good or to involve me in any evil, but I alone
myself over myself have power in these things. When, then, these
things are secured to me, why need I be disturbed about external
things? What tyrant is formidable, what disease, what poverty, what
offense? "Well, I have not pleased a certain person." Is he then my
work, my judgement? "No." Why then should I trouble myself about
him? "But he is supposed to be some one." He will look to that
himself; and those who think so will also. But I have One Whom I ought
to please, to Whom I ought to subject myself, Whom I ought to obey,
God and those who are next to Him. He has placed me with myself, and
has put my will in obedience to myself alone, and has given me rules
for the right use of it; and when I follow these rules in
syllogisms, I do not care for any man who says anything else: in
sophistical argument, I care for no man. Why then in greater matters
do those annoy me who blame me? What is the cause of this
perturbation? Nothing else than because in this matter I am not
disciplined. For all knowledge despises ignorance and the ignorant;
and not only the sciences, but even the arts. Produce any shoemaker
that you please, and he ridicules the many in respect to his own work.
Produce any carpenter.

  First, then, we ought to have these in readiness, and to do
nothing without them, and we ought to keep the soul directed to this
mark, to pursue nothing external, and nothing which belongs to others,
but to do as He has appointed Who has the power; we ought to pursue
altogether the things which are in the power of the will, and all
other things as it is permitted. Next to this we ought to remember who
we are, and what is our name, and to endeavour to direct our duties
toward the character of our several relations in this manner: what
is the season for singing, what is the season for play, and in whose
presence; what will be the consequence of the act; whether our
associates will despise us, whether we shall despise them; when to
jeer, and whom to ridicule; and on what occasion to comply and with
whom; and finally, in complying how to maintain our own character. But
wherever you have deviated from any of these rules, there is damage
immediately, not from anything external, but from the action itself.

  What then? is it possible to be free from faults? It is not
possible; but tills is possible, to direct your efforts incessantly to
being faultless. For we must be content if by never remitting this
attention we shall escape at least a few errors. But now when you have
said, "To-morrow I will begin to attend," you must be told that you
are saying this, "To-day I will be shameless, disregardful of time and
place, mean; it will be in the power of others to give me pain; to-day
I will be passionate and envious." See how many evil things you are
permitting yourself to do. If it is good to use attention to-morrow,
how much better is it to do so to-day? if to-morrow it is in your
interest to attend, much more is it to-day, that you may be able to do
so to-morrow also, and may not defer it again to the third day.

  CHAPTER 13

  Against or to those who readily tell their own affairs

  When a man has seemed to us to have talked with simplicity about his
own affairs, how is it that at last we are ourselves also induced to
discover to him our own secrets and we think this to be candid
behavior? In the first place, because it seems unfair for a man to
have listened to the affairs of his neighbour, and not to
communicate to him also in turn our own affairs: next, because we
think that we shall not present to them the appearance of candid men
when we are silent about our own affairs. Indeed men are often
accustomed to say, "I have told you all my affairs, will you tell me
nothing of your own? where is this done?" Besides, we have also this
opinion that we can safely trust him who has already told us his own
affairs; for the notion rises in our mind that this man could never
divulge our affairs because he would be cautious that we also should
not divulge his. In this way also the incautious are caught by the
soldiers at Rome. A soldier sits by you in a common dress and begins
to speak ill of Caesar; then you, as if you had received a pledge of
his fidelity by his having begun the abuse, utter yourself also what
you think, and then you are carried off in chains.

  Something of this kind happens to us generally. Now as this man
has confidently intrusted his affairs to me, shall I also do so to any
man whom I meet? For when I have heard, I keep silence, if I am of
such a disposition; but he goes forth and tells all men what he has
heard. Then if I hear what has been done, if I be a man like him, I
resolve to be revenged, I divulge what he has told me; I both
disturb others and am disturbed myself. But if I remember that one man
does not injure another, and that every man's acts injure and profit
him, I secure this, that I do not anything like him, but still I
suffer what I do suffer through my own silly talk.

  "True: but it is unfair when you have heard the secrets of your
neighbour for you in turn to communicate nothing to him." Did I ask
you for your secrets, my man? did you communicate your affairs on
certain terms, that you should in return hear mine also? If you are
a babbler and think that all who meet you are friends, do you wish
me also to be like you? But why, if you did well in entrusting your
affairs to me, and it is not well for me to intrust mine to you, do
you wish me to be so rash? It is just the same as if I had a cask
which is water-tight, and you one with a hole in it, and you should
come and deposit with me your wine that I might put it into my cask,
and then should complain that I also did not intrust my wine to you,
for you have a cask with a hole in it. How then is there any
equality here? You intrusted your affairs to a man who is faithful and
modest, to a man who thinks that his own actions alone are injurious
and useful, and that nothing external is. Would you have me intrust
mine to you, a man who has dishonoured his own faculty of will, and
who wishes to gain some small bit of money or some office or promotion
in the court, even if you should be going to murder your own children,
like Medea? Where is this equality? But show yourself to me to be
faithful, modest, and steady: show me that you have friendly opinions;
show that your cask has no hole in it; and you will see how I shall
not wait for you to trust me with your affairs, but I myself shall
come to you and ask you to hear mine. For who does not choose to
make use of a good vessel? Who does not value a benevolent and
faithful adviser? who will not willingly receive a man who is ready to
bear a share, as we may say, of the difficulty of his circumstances,
and by this very act to ease the burden, by taking a part of it.

  "True: but I trust you; you do not trust me." In the first place,
not even do you trust me, but you are a babbler, and for this reason
you cannot hold anything; for indeed, if it is true that you trust me,
trust your affairs to me only; but now, whenever you see a man at
leisure, you seat yourself by him and say: "Brother, I have no
friend more benevolent than you nor dearer; I request you to listen to
my affairs." And you do this even to those who are not known to you at
all. But if you really trust me, it is plain that you trust me because
I am faithful and modest, not because I have told my affairs to you.
Allow me, then, to have the same opinion about you. Show me that, if
one man tells his affairs to another, he who tells them is faithful
and modest. For if this were so, I would go about and tell my
affairs to every man, if that would make me faithful and modest. But
the thing is not so, and it requires no common opinions. If, then, you
see a man who is busy about things not dependent on his will and
subjecting his will to them, you must know that this man has ten
thousand persons to compel and hinder him. He has no need of pitch
or the wheel to compel him to declare what he knows: but a little
girl's nod, if it should so happen, will move him, the blandishment of
one who belongs to Caesar's court, desire of a magistracy or of an
inheritance, and things without end of that sort. You must remember,
then, among general principles that secret discourses require fidelity
and corresponding opinions. But where can we now find these easily? Or
if you cannot answer that question, let some one point out to me a man
who can say: "I care only about the things which are my own, the
things which are not subject to hindrance, the things which are by
nature free." This I hold to be the nature of the good: but let all
other things be as they are allowed; I do not concern myself.

  1. Some things are in our control and others not. Things in
           our control are opinion, pursuit, desire, aversion, and, in a
           word, whatever are our own actions. Things not in our control
           are body, property, reputation, command, and, in one word,
           whatever are not our own actions.

           The things in our control are by nature free, unrestrained,
           unhindered; but those not in our control are weak, slavish,
           restrained, belonging to others. Remember, then, that if you
           suppose that things which are slavish by nature are also free,
           and that what belongs to others is your own, then you will be
           hindered. You will lament, you will be disturbed, and you will
           find fault both with gods and men. But if you suppose that
           only to be your own which is your own, and what belongs to
           others such as it really is, then no one will ever compel you
           or restrain you. Further, you will find fault with no one or
           accuse no one. You will do nothing against your will. No one
           will hurt you, you will have no enemies, and you not be
           harmed.

           Aiming therefore at such great things, remember that you must
           not allow yourself to be carried, even with a slight tendency,
           towards the attainment of lesser things. Instead, you must
           entirely quit some things and for the present postpone the
           rest. But if you would both have these great things, along
           with power and riches, then you will not gain even the latter,
           because you aim at the former too: but you will absolutely
           fail of the former, by which alone happiness and freedom are
           achieved.

           Work, therefore to be able to say to every harsh appearance,
           "You are but an appearance, and not absolutely the thing you
           appear to be." And then examine it by those rules which you
           have, and first, and chiefly, by this: whether it concerns the
           things which are in our own control, or those which are not;
           and, if it concerns anything not in our control, be prepared
           to say that it is nothing to you.

           2. Remember that following desire promises the attainment of
           that of which you are desirous; and aversion promises the
           avoiding that to which you are averse. However, he who fails
           to obtain the object of his desire is disappointed, and he who
           incurs the object of his aversion wretched. If, then, you
           confine your aversion to those objects only which are contrary
           to the natural use of your faculties, which you have in your
           own control, you will never incur anything to which you are
           averse. But if you are averse to sickness, or death, or
           poverty, you will be wretched. Remove aversion, then, from all
           things that are not in our control, and transfer it to things
           contrary to the nature of what is in our control. But, for the
           present, totally suppress desire: for, if you desire any of
           the things which are not in your own control, you must
           necessarily be disappointed; and of those which are, and which
           it would be laudable to desire, nothing is yet in your
           possession. Use only the appropriate actions of pursuit and
           avoidance; and even these lightly, and with gentleness and
           reservation.

           3. With regard to whatever objects give you delight, are
           useful, or are deeply loved, remember to tell yourself of what
           general nature they are, beginning from the most insignificant
           things. If, for example, you are fond of a specific ceramic
           cup, remind yourself that it is only ceramic cups in general
           of which you are fond. Then, if it breaks, you will not be
           disturbed. If you kiss your child, or your wife, say that you
           only kiss things which are human, and thus you will not be
           disturbed if either of them dies.

           4. When you are going about any action, remind yourself what
           nature the action is. If you are going to bathe, picture to
           yourself the things which usually happen in the bath: some
           people splash the water, some push, some use abusive language,
           and others steal. Thus you will more safely go about this
           action if you say to yourself, "I will now go bathe, and keep
           my own mind in a state conformable to nature." And in the same
           manner with regard to every other action. For thus, if any
           hindrance arises in bathing, you will have it ready to say,
           "It was not only to bathe that I desired, but to keep my mind
           in a state conformable to nature; and I will not keep it if I
           am bothered at things that happen.

           5. Men are disturbed, not by things, but by the principles and
           notions which they form concerning things. Death, for
           instance, is not terrible, else it would have appeared so to
           Socrates. But the terror consists in our notion of death that
           it is terrible. When therefore we are hindered, or disturbed,
           or grieved, let us never attribute it to others, but to
           ourselves; that is, to our own principles. An uninstructed
           person will lay the fault of his own bad condition upon
           others. Someone just starting instruction will lay the fault
           on himself. Some who is perfectly instructed will place blame
           neither on others nor on himself.

           6. Don't be prideful with any excellence that is not your own.
           If a horse should be prideful and say, " I am handsome," it
           would be supportable. But when you are prideful, and say, " I
           have a handsome horse," know that you are proud of what is, in
           fact, only the good of the horse. What, then, is your own?
           Only your reaction to the appearances of things. Thus, when
           you behave conformably to nature in reaction to how things
           appear, you will be proud with reason; for you will take pride
           in some good of your own.

           7. Consider when, on a voyage, your ship is anchored; if you
           go on shore to get water you may along the way amuse yourself
           with picking up a shellish, or an onion. However, your
           thoughts and continual attention ought to be bent towards the
           ship, waiting for the captain to call on board; you must then
           immediately leave all these things, otherwise you will be
           thrown into the ship, bound neck and feet like a sheep. So it
           is with life. If, instead of an onion or a shellfish, you are
           given a wife or child, that is fine. But if the captain calls,
           you must run to the ship, leaving them, and regarding none of
           them. But if you are old, never go far from the ship: lest,
           when you are called, you should be unable to come in time.

           8. Don't demand that things happen as you wish, but wish that
           they happen as they do happen, and you will go on well.

           9. Sickness is a hindrance to the body, but not to your
           ability to choose, unless that is your choice. Lameness is a
           hindrance to the leg, but not to your ability to choose. Say
           this to yourself with regard to everything that happens, then
           you will see such obstacles as hindrances to something else,
           but not to yourself.

           10. With every accident, ask yourself what abilities you have
           for making a proper use of it. If you see an attractive
           person, you will find that self-restraint is the ability you
           have against your desire. If you are in pain, you will find
           fortitude. If you hear unpleasant language, you will find
           patience. And thus habituated, the appearances of things will
           not hurry you away along with them.

           11. Never say of anything, "I have lost it"; but, "I have
           returned it." Is your child dead? It is returned. Is your wife
           dead? She is returned. Is your estate taken away? Well, and is
           not that likewise returned? "But he who took it away is a bad
           man." What difference is it to you who the giver assigns to
           take it back? While he gives it to you to possess, take care
           of it; but don't view it as your own, just as travelers view a
           hotel.

           12. If you want to improve, reject such reasonings as these:
           "If I neglect my affairs, I'll have no income; if I don't
           correct my servant, he will be bad." For it is better to die
           with hunger, exempt from grief and fear, than to live in
           affluence with perturbation; and it is better your servant
           should be bad, than you unhappy.

           Begin therefore from little things. Is a little oil spilt? A
           little wine stolen? Say to yourself, "This is the price paid
           for apathy, for tranquillity, and nothing is to be had for
           nothing." When you call your servant, it is possible that he
           may not come; or, if he does, he may not do what you want. But
           he is by no means of such importance that it should be in his
           power to give you any disturbance.

           13. If you want to improve, be content to be thought foolish
           and stupid with regard to external things. Don't wish to be
           thought to know anything; and even if you appear to be
           somebody important to others, distrust yourself. For, it is
           difficult to both keep your faculty of choice in a state
           conformable to nature, and at the same time acquire external
           things. But while you are careful about the one, you must of
           necessity neglect the other.

           14. If you wish your children, and your wife, and your friends
           to live for ever, you are stupid; for you wish to be in
           control of things which you cannot, you wish for things that
           belong to others to be your own. So likewise, if you wish your
           servant to be without fault, you are a fool; for you wish vice
           not to be vice," but something else. But, if you wish to have
           your desires undisappointed, this is in your own control.
           Exercise, therefore, what is in your control. He is the master
           of every other person who is able to confer or remove whatever
           that person wishes either to have or to avoid. Whoever, then,
           would be free, let him wish nothing, let him decline nothing,
           which depends on others else he must necessarily be a slave.

           15. Remember that you must behave in life as at a dinner
           party. Is anything brought around to you? Put out your hand
           and take your share with moderation. Does it pass by you?
           Don't stop it. Is it not yet come? Don't stretch your desire
           towards it, but wait till it reaches you. Do this with regard
           to children, to a wife, to public posts, to riches, and you
           will eventually be a worthy partner of the feasts of the gods.
           And if you don't even take the things which are set before
           you, but are able even to reject them, then you will not only
           be a partner at the feasts of the gods, but also of their
           empire. For, by doing this, Diogenes, Heraclitus and others
           like them, deservedly became, and were called, divine.

           16. When you see anyone weeping in grief because his son has
           gone abroad, or is dead, or because he has suffered in his
           affairs, be careful that the appearance may not misdirect you.
           Instead, distinguish within your own mind, and be prepared to
           say, "It's not the accident that distresses this person.,
           because it doesn't distress another person; it is the judgment
           which he makes about it." As far as words go, however, don't
           reduce yourself to his level, and certainly do not moan with
           him. Do not moan inwardly either.

           17. Remember that you are an actor in a drama, of such a kind
           as the author pleases to make it. If short, of a short one; if
           long, of a long one. If it is his pleasure you should act a
           poor man, a cripple, a governor, or a private person, see that
           you act it naturally. For this is your business, to act well
           the character assigned you; to choose it is another's.

           18. When a raven happens to croak unluckily, don't allow the
           appearance hurry you away with it, but immediately make the
           distinction to yourself, and say, "None of these things are
           foretold to me; but either to my paltry body, or property, or
           reputation, or children, or wife. But to me all omens are
           lucky, if I will. For whichever of these things happens, it is
           in my control to derive advantage from it."

           19. You may be unconquerable, if you enter into no combat in
           which it is not in your own control to conquer. When,
           therefore, you see anyone eminent in honors, or power, or in
           high esteem on any other account, take heed not to be hurried
           away with the appearance, and to pronounce him happy; for, if
           the essence of good consists in things in our own control,
           there will be no room for envy or emulation. But, for your
           part, don't wish to be a general, or a senator, or a consul,
           but to be free; and the only way to this is a contempt of
           things not in our own control.

           20. Remember, that not he who gives ill language or a blow
           insults, but the principle which represents these things as
           insulting. When, therefore, anyone provokes you, be assured
           that it is your own opinion which provokes you. Try,
           therefore, in the first place, not to be hurried away with the
           appearance. For if you once gain time and respite, you will
           more easily command yourself.

           21. Let death and exile, and all other things which appear
           terrible be daily before your eyes, but chiefly death, and you
           win never entertain any abject thought, nor too eagerly covet
           anything.

           22. If you have an earnest desire of attaining to philosophy,
           prepare yourself from the very first to be laughed at, to be
           sneered by the multitude, to hear them say,." He is returned
           to us a philosopher all at once," and " Whence this
           supercilious look?" Now, for your part, don't have a
           supercilious look indeed; but keep steadily to those things
           which appear best to you as one appointed by God to this
           station. For remember that, if you adhere to the same point,
           those very persons who at first ridiculed will afterwards
           admire you. But if you are conquered by them, you will incur a
           double ridicule.

           23. If you ever happen to turn your attention to externals, so
           as to wish to please anyone, be assured that you have ruined
           your scheme of life. Be contented, then, in everything with
           being a philosopher; and, if you wish to be thought so
           likewise by anyone, appear so to yourself, and it will suffice
           you.

           24. Don't allow such considerations as these distress you. "I
           will live in dishonor, and be nobody anywhere." For, if
           dishonor is an evil, you can no more be involved in any evil
           by the means of another, than be engaged in anything base. Is
           it any business of yours, then, to get power, or to be
           admitted to an entertainment? By no means. How, then, after
           all, is this a dishonor? And how is it true that you will be
           nobody anywhere, when you ought to be somebody in those things
           only which are in your own control, in which you may be of the
           greatest consequence? "But my friends will be unassisted." --
           What do you mean by unassisted? They will not have money from
           you, nor will you make them Roman citizens. Who told you,
           then, that these are among the things in our own control, and
           not the affair of others? And who can give to another the
           things which he has not himself? "Well, but get them, then,
           that we too may have a share." If I can get them with the
           preservation of my own honor and fidelity and greatness of
           mind, show me the way and I will get them; but if you require
           me to lose my own proper good that you may gain what is not
           good, consider how inequitable and foolish you are. Besides,
           which would you rather have, a sum of money, or a friend of
           fidelity and honor? Rather assist me, then, to gain this
           character than require me to do those things by which I may
           lose it. Well, but my country, say you, as far as depends on
           me, will be unassisted. Here again, what assistance is this
           you mean? "It will not have porticoes nor baths of your
           providing." And what signifies that? Why, neither does a smith
           provide it with shoes, or a shoemaker with arms. It is enough
           if everyone fully performs his own proper business. And were
           you to supply it with another citizen of honor and fidelity,
           would not he be of use to it? Yes. Therefore neither are you
           yourself useless to it. "What place, then, say you, will I
           hold in the state?" Whatever you can hold with the
           preservation of your fidelity and honor. But if, by desiring
           to be useful to that, you lose these, of what use can you be
           to your country when you are become faithless and void of
           shame.

           25. Is anyone preferred before you at an entertainment, or in
           a compliment, or in being admitted to a consultation? If these
           things are good, you ought to be glad that he has gotten them;
           and if they are evil, don't be grieved that you have not
           gotten them. And remember that you cannot, without using the
           same means [which others do] to acquire things not in our own
           control, expect to be thought worthy of an equal share of
           them. For how can he who does not frequent the door of any
           [great] man, does not attend him, does not praise him, have an
           equal share with him who does? You are unjust, then, and
           insatiable, if you are unwilling to pay the price for which
           these things are sold, and would have them for nothing. For
           how much is lettuce sold? Fifty cents, for instance. If
           another, then, paying fifty cents, takes the lettuce, and you,
           not paying it, go without them, don't imagine that he has
           gained any advantage over you. For as he has the lettuce, so
           you have the fifty cents which you did not give. So, in the
           present case, you have not been invited to such a person's
           entertainment, because you have not paid him the price for
           which a supper is sold. It is sold for praise; it is sold for
           attendance. Give him then the value, if it is for your
           advantage. But if you would, at the same time, not pay the one
           and yet receive the other, you are insatiable, and a
           blockhead. Have you nothing, then, instead of the supper? Yes,
           indeed, you have: the not praising him, whom you don't like to
           praise; the not bearing with his behavior at coming in.

           26. The will of nature may be learned from those things in
           which we don't distinguish from each other. For example, when
           our neighbor's boy breaks a cup, or the like, we are presently
           ready to say, "These things will happen." Be assured, then,
           that when your own cup likewise is broken, you ought to be
           affected just as when another's cup was broken. Apply this in
           like manner to greater things. Is the child or wife of another
           dead? There is no one who would not say, "This is a human
           accident." but if anyone's own child happens to die, it is
           presently, "Alas I how wretched am I!" But it should be
           remembered how we are affected in hearing the same thing
           concerning others.

           27. As a mark is not set up for the sake of missing the aim,
           so neither does the nature of evil exist in the world.

           28. If a person gave your body to any stranger he met on his
           way, you would certainly be angry. And do you feel no shame in
           handing over your own mind to be confused and mystified by
           anyone who happens to verbally attack you?

           29. In every affair consider what precedes and follows, and
           then undertake it. Otherwise you will begin with spirit; but
           not having thought of the consequences, when some of them
           appear you will shamefully desist. "I would conquer at the
           Olympic games." But consider what precedes and follows, and
           then, if it is for your advantage, engage in the affair. You
           must conform to rules, submit to a diet, refrain from
           dainties; exercise your body, whether you choose it or not, at
           a stated hour, in heat and cold; you must drink no cold water,
           nor sometimes even wine. In a word, you must give yourself up
           to your master, as to a physician. Then, in the combat, you
           may be thrown into a ditch, dislocate your arm, turn your
           ankle, swallow dust, be whipped, and, after all, lose the
           victory. When you have evaluated all this, if your inclination
           still holds, then go to war. Otherwise, take notice, you will
           behave like children who sometimes play like wrestlers,
           sometimes gladiators, sometimes blow a trumpet, and sometimes
           act a tragedy when they have seen and admired these shows.
           Thus you too will be at one time a wrestler, at another a
           gladiator, now a philosopher, then an orator; but with your
           whole soul, nothing at all. Like an ape, you mimic all you
           see, and one thing after another is sure to please you, but is
           out of favor as soon as it becomes familiar. For you have
           never entered upon anything considerately, nor after having
           viewed the whole matter on all sides, or made any scrutiny
           into it, but rashly, and with a cold inclination. Thus some,
           when they have seen a philosopher and heard a man speaking
           like Euphrates (though, indeed, who can speak like him?), have
           a mind to be philosophers too. Consider first, man, what the
           matter is, and what your own nature is able to bear. If you
           would be a wrestler, consider your shoulders, your back, your
           thighs; for different persons are made for different things.
           Do you think that you can act as you do, and be a philosopher?
           That you can eat and drink, and be angry and discontented as
           you are now? You must watch, you must labor, you must get the
           better of certain appetites, must quit your acquaintance, be
           despised by your servant, be laughed at by those you meet;
           come off worse than others in everything, in magistracies, in
           honors, in courts of judicature. When you have considered all
           these things round, approach, if you please; if, by parting
           with them, you have a mind to purchase apathy, freedom, and
           tranquillity. If not, don't come here; don't, like children,
           be one while a philosopher, then a publican, then an orator,
           and then one of Caesar's officers. These things are not
           consistent. You must be one man, either good or bad. You must
           cultivate either your own ruling faculty or externals, and
           apply yourself either to things within or without you; that
           is, be either a philosopher, or one of the vulgar.

           30. Duties are universally measured by relations. Is anyone a
           father? If so, it is implied that the children should take
           care of him, submit to him in everything, patiently listen to
           his reproaches, his correction. But he is a bad father. Is you
           naturally entitled, then, to a good father? No, only to a
           father. Is a brother unjust? Well, keep your own situation
           towards him. Consider not what he does, but what you are to do
           to keep your own faculty of choice in a state conformable to
           nature. For another will not hurt you unless you please. You
           will then be hurt when you think you are hurt. In this manner,
           therefore, you will find, from the idea of a neighbor, a
           citizen, a general, the corresponding duties if you accustom
           yourself to contemplate the several relations.

           31. Be assured that the essential property of piety towards
           the gods is to form right opinions concerning them, as
           existing "I and as governing the universe with goodness and
           justice. And fix yourself in this resolution, to obey them,
           and yield to them, and willingly follow them in all events, as
           produced by the most perfect understanding. For thus you will
           never find fault with the gods, nor accuse them as neglecting
           you. And it is not possible for this to be effected any other
           way than by withdrawing yourself from things not in our own
           control, and placing good or evil in those only which are. For
           if you suppose any of the things not in our own control to be
           either good or evil, when you are disappointed of what you
           wish, or incur what you would avoid, you must necessarily find
           fault with and blame the authors. For every animal is
           naturally formed to fly and abhor things that appear hurtful,
           and the causes of them; and to pursue and admire those which
           appear beneficial, and the causes of them. It is impractical,
           then, that one who supposes himself to be hurt should be happy
           about the person who, he thinks, hurts him, just as it is
           impossible to be happy about the hurt itself. Hence, also, a
           father is reviled by a son, when he does not impart to him the
           things which he takes to be good; and the supposing empire to
           be a good made Polynices and Eteocles mutually enemies. On
           this account the husbandman, the sailor, the merchant, on this
           account those who lose wives and children, revile the gods.
           For where interest is, there too is piety placed. So that,
           whoever is careful to regulate his desires and aversions as he
           ought, is, by the very same means, careful of piety likewise.
           But it is also incumbent on everyone to offer libations and
           sacrifices and first fruits, conformably to the customs of his
           country, with purity, and not in a slovenly manner, nor
           negligently, nor sparingly, nor beyond his ability.

           32. When you have recourse to divination, remember that you
           know not what the event will be, and you come to learn it of
           the diviner; but of what nature it is you know before you
           come, at least if you are a philosopher. For if it is among
           the things not in our own control, it can by no means be
           either good or evil. Don't, therefore, bring either desire or
           aversion with you to the diviner (else you will approach him
           trembling), but first acquire a distinct knowledge that every
           event is indifferent and nothing to you., of whatever sort it
           may be, for it will be in your power to make a right use of
           it, and this no one can hinder; then come with confidence to
           the gods, as your counselors, and afterwards, when any counsel
           is given you, remember what counselors you have assumed, and
           whose advice you will neglect if you disobey. Come to
           divination, as Socrates prescribed, in cases of which the
           whole consideration relates to the event, and in which no
           opportunities are afforded by reason, or any other art, to
           discover the thing proposed to be learned. When, therefore, it
           is our duty to share the danger of a friend or of our country,
           we ought not to consult the oracle whether we will share it
           with them or not. For, though the diviner should forewarn you
           that the victims are unfavorable, this means no more than that
           either death or mutilation or exile is portended. But we have
           reason within us, and it directs, even with these hazards, to
           the greater diviner, the Pythian god, who cast out of the
           temple the person who gave no assistance to his friend while
           another was murdering him.

           33. Immediately prescribe some character and form of conduce
           to yourself, which you may keep both alone and in company.

           Be for the most part silent, or speak merely what is
           necessary, and in few words. We may, however, enter, though
           sparingly, into discourse sometimes when occasion calls for
           it, but not on any of the common subjects, of gladiators, or
           horse races, or athletic champions, or feasts, the vulgar
           topics of conversation; but principally not of men, so as
           either to blame, or praise, or make comparisons. If you are
           able, then, by your own conversation bring over that of your
           company to proper subjects; but, if you happen to be taken
           among strangers, be silent.

           Don't allow your laughter be much, nor on many occasions, nor
           profuse.

           Avoid swearing, if possible, altogether; if not, as far as you
           are able.

           Avoid public and vulgar entertainments; but, if ever an
           occasion calls you to them, keep your attention upon the
           stretch, that you may not imperceptibly slide into vulgar
           manners. For be assured that if a person be ever so sound
           himself, yet, if his companion be infected, he who converses
           with him will be infected likewise.

           Provide things relating to the body no further than mere use;
           as meat, drink, clothing, house, family. But strike off and
           reject everything relating to show and delicacy.

           As far as possible, before marriage, keep yourself pure from
           familiarities with women, and, if you indulge them, let it be
           lawfully." But don't therefore be troublesome and full of
           reproofs to those who use these liberties, nor frequently
           boast that you yourself don't.

           If anyone tells you that such a person speaks ill of you,
           don't make excuses about what is said of you, but answer: " He
           does not know my other faults, else he would not have
           mentioned only these."

           It is not necessary for you to appear often at public
           spectacles; but if ever there is a proper occasion for you to
           be there, don't appear more solicitous for anyone than for
           yourself; that is, wish things to be only just as they are,
           and him only to conquer who is the conqueror, for thus you
           will meet with no hindrance. But abstain entirely from
           declamations and derision and violent emotions. And when you
           come away, don't discourse a great deal on what has passed,
           and what does not contribute to your own amendment. For it
           would appear by such discourse that you were immoderately
           struck with the show.

           Go not [of your own accord] to the rehearsals of any
           [authors], nor appear [at them] readily. But, if you do
           appear, keep your gravity and sedateness, and at the same time
           avoid being morose.

           When you are going to confer with anyone, and particularly of
           those in a superior station, represent to yourself how
           Socrates or Zeno would behave in such a case, and you will not
           be at a loss to make a proper use of whatever may occur.

           When you are going to any of the people in power, represent to
           yourself that you will not find him at home; that you will not
           be admitted; that the doors will not be opened to you; that he
           will take no notice of you. If, with all this, it is your duty
           to go, bear what happens, and never say [to yourself], " It
           was not worth so much." For this is vulgar, and like a man
           dazed by external things.

           In parties of conversation, avoid a frequent and excessive
           mention of your own actions and dangers. For, however
           agreeable it may be to yourself to mention the risks you have
           run, it is not equally agreeable to others to hear your
           adventures. Avoid, likewise, an endeavor to excite laughter.
           For this is a slippery point, which may throw you into vulgar
           manners, and, besides, may be apt to lessen you in the esteem
           of your acquaintance. Approaches to indecent discourse are
           likewise dangerous. Whenever, therefore, anything of this sort
           happens, if there be a proper opportunity, rebuke him who
           makes advances that way; or, at least, by silence and blushing
           and a forbidding look, show yourself to be displeased by such
           talk.

           34. If you are struck by the appearance of any promised
           pleasure, guard yourself against being hurried away by it; but
           let the affair wait your leisure, and procure yourself some
           delay. Then bring to your mind both points of time: that in
           which you will enjoy the pleasure, and that in which you will
           repent and reproach yourself after you have enjoyed it; and
           set before you, in opposition to these, how you will be glad
           and applaud yourself if you abstain. And even though it should
           appear to you a seasonable gratification, take heed that its
           enticing, and agreeable and attractive force may not subdue
           you; but set in opposition to this how much better it is to be
           conscious of having gained so great a victory.

           35. When you do anything from a clear judgment that it ought
           to be done, never shun the being seen to do it, even though
           the world should make a wrong supposition about it; for, if
           you don't act right, shun the action itself; but, if you do,
           why are you afraid of those who censure you wrongly?

           36. As the proposition, "Either it is day or it is night," is
           extremely proper for a disjunctive argument, but quite
           improper in a conjunctive one, so, at a feast, to choose the
           largest share is very suitable to the bodily appetite, but
           utterly inconsistent with the social spirit of an
           entertainment. When you eat with another, then, remember not
           only the value of those things which are set before you to the
           body, but the value of that behavior which ought to be
           observed towards the person who gives the entertainment.

           37. If you have assumed any character above your strength, you
           have both made an ill figure in that and quitted one which you
           might have supported.

           38. When walking, you are careful not to step on a nail or
           turn your foot; so likewise be careful not to hurt the ruling
           faculty of your mind. And, if we were to guard against this in
           every action, we should undertake the action with the greater
           safety.

           39. The body is to everyone the measure of the possessions
           proper for it, just as the foot is of the shoe. If, therefore,
           you stop at this, you will keep the measure; but if you move
           beyond it, you must necessarily be carried forward, as down a
           cliff; as in the case of a shoe, if you go beyond its fitness
           to the foot, it comes first to be gilded, then purple, and
           then studded with jewels. For to that which once exceeds a due
           measure, there is no bound.

           40. Women from fourteen years old are flattered with the title
           of "mistresses" by the men. Therefore, perceiving that they
           are regarded only as qualified to give the men pleasure, they
           begin to adorn themselves, and in that to place ill their
           hopes. We should, therefore, fix our attention on making them
           sensible that they are valued for the appearance of decent,
           modest and discreet behavior.

           41. It is a mark of want of genius to spend much time in
           things relating to the body, as to be long in our exercises,
           in eating and drinking, and in the discharge of other animal
           functions. These should be done incidentally and slightly, and
           our whole attention be engaged in the care of the
           understanding.

           42. When any person harms you, or speaks badly of you,
           remember that he acts or speaks from a supposition of its
           being his duty. Now, it is not possible that he should follow
           what appears right to you, but what appears so to himself.
           Therefore, if he judges from a wrong appearance, he is the
           person hurt, since he too is the person deceived. For if
           anyone should suppose a true proposition to be false, the
           proposition is not hurt, but he who is deceived about it.
           Setting out, then, from these principles, you will meekly bear
           a person who reviles you, for you will say upon every
           occasion, "It seemed so to him."

           43. Everything has two handles, the one by which it may be
           carried, the other by which it cannot. If your brother acts
           unjustly, don't lay hold on the action by the handle of his
           injustice, for by that it cannot be carried; but by the
           opposite, that he is your brother, that he was brought up with
           you; and thus you will lay hold on it, as it is to be carried.

           44. These reasonings are unconnected: "I am richer than you,
           therefore I am better"; "I am more eloquent than you,
           therefore I am better." The connection is rather this: "I am
           richer than you, therefore my property is greater than yours;"
           "I am more eloquent than you, therefore my style is better
           than yours." But you, after all, are neither property nor
           style.

           45. Does anyone bathe in a mighty little time? Don't say that
           he does it ill, but in a mighty little time. Does anyone drink
           a great quantity of wine? Don't say that he does ill, but that
           he drinks a great quantity. For, unless you perfectly
           understand the principle from which anyone acts, how should
           you know if he acts ill? Thus you will not run the hazard of
           assenting to any appearances but such as you fully comprehend.

           46. Never call yourself a philosopher, nor talk a great deal
           among the unlearned about theorems, but act conformably to
           them. Thus, at an entertainment, don't talk how persons ought
           to eat, but eat as you ought. For remember that in this manner
           Socrates also universally avoided all ostentation. And when
           persons came to him and desired to be recommended by him to
           philosophers, he took and- recommended them, so well did he
           bear being overlooked. So that if ever any talk should happen
           among the unlearned concerning philosophic theorems, be you,
           for the most part, silent. For there is great danger in
           immediately throwing out what you have not digested. And, if
           anyone tells you that you know nothing, and you are not
           nettled at it, then you may be sure that you have begun your
           business. For sheep don't throw up the grass to show the
           shepherds how much they have eaten; but, inwardly digesting
           their food, they outwardly produce wool and milk. Thus,
           therefore, do you likewise not show theorems to the unlearned,
           but the actions produced by them after they have been
           digested.

           47. When you have brought yourself to supply the necessities
           of your body at a small price, don't pique yourself upon it;
           nor, if you drink water, be saying upon every occasion, "I
           drink water." But first consider how much more sparing and
           patient of hardship the poor are than we. But if at any time
           you would inure yourself by exercise to labor, and bearing
           hard trials, do it for your own sake, and not for the world;
           don't grasp statues, but, when you are violently thirsty, take
           a little cold water in your mouth, and spurt it out and tell
           nobody.

           48. The condition and characteristic of a vulgar person, is,
           that he never expects either benefit or hurt from himself, but
           from externals. The condition and characteristic of a
           philosopher is, that he expects all hurt and benefit from
           himself. The marks of a proficient are, that he censures no
           one, praises no one, blames no one, accuses no one, says
           nothing concerning himself as being anybody, or knowing
           anything: when he is, in any instance, hindered or restrained,
           he accuses himself; and, if he is praised, he secretly laughs
           at the person who praises him; and, if he is censured, he
           makes no defense. But he goes about with the caution of sick
           or injured people, dreading to move anything that is set
           right, before it is perfectly fixed. He suppresses all desire
           in himself; he transfers his aversion to those things only
           which thwart the proper use of our own faculty of choice; the
           exertion of his active powers towards anything is very gentle;
           if he appears stupid or ignorant, he does not care, and, in a
           word, he watches himself as an enemy, and one in ambush.

           49. When anyone shows himself overly confident in ability to
           understand and interpret the works of Chrysippus, say to
           yourself, " Unless Chrysippus had written obscurely, this
           person would have had no subject for his vanity. But what do I
           desire? To understand nature and follow her. I ask, then, who
           interprets her, and, finding Chrysippus does, I have recourse
           to him. I don't understand his writings. I seek, therefore,
           one to interpret them." So far there is nothing to value
           myself upon. And when I find an interpreter, what remains is
           to make use of his instructions. This alone is the valuable
           thing. But, if I admire nothing but merely the interpretation,
           what do I become more than a grammarian instead of a
           philosopher? Except, indeed, that instead of Homer I interpret
           Chrysippus. When anyone, therefore, desires me to read
           Chrysippus to him, I rather blush when I cannot show my
           actions agreeable and consonant to his discourse.

           50. Whatever moral rules you have deliberately proposed to
           yourself. abide by them as they were laws, and as if you would
           be guilty of impiety by violating any of them. Don't regard
           what anyone says of you, for this, after all, is no concern of
           yours. How long, then, will you put off thinking yourself
           worthy of the highest improvements and follow the distinctions
           of reason? You have received the philosophical theorems, with
           which you ought to be familiar, and you have been familiar
           with them. What other master, then, do you wait for, to throw
           upon that the delay of reforming yourself? You are no longer a
           boy, but a grown man. If, therefore, you will be negligent and
           slothful, and always add procrastination to procrastination,
           purpose to purpose, and fix day after day in which you will
           attend to yourself, you will insensibly continue without
           proficiency, and, living and dying, persevere in being one of
           the vulgar. This instant, then, think yourself worthy of
           living as a man grown up, and a proficient. Let whatever
           appears to be the best be to you an inviolable law. And if any
           instance of pain or pleasure, or glory or disgrace, is set
           before you, remember that now is the combat, now the Olympiad
           comes on, nor can it be put off. By once being defeated and
           giving way, proficiency is lost, or by the contrary preserved.
           Thus Socrates became perfect, improving himself by everything.
           attending to nothing but reason. And though you are not yet a
           Socrates, you ought, however, to live as one desirous of
           becoming a Socrates.

           51. The first and most necessary topic in philosophy is that
           of the use of moral theorems, such as, "We ought not to lie;"
           the second is that of demonstrations, such as, "What is the
           origin of our obligation not to lie;" the third gives strength
           and articulation to the other two, such as, "What is the
           origin of this is a demonstration." For what is demonstration?
           What is consequence? What contradiction? What truth? What
           falsehood? The third topic, then, is necessary on the account
           of the second, and the second on the account of the first. But
           the most necessary, and that whereon we ought to rest, is the
           first. But we act just on the contrary. For we spend all our
           time on the third topic, and employ all our diligence about
           that, and entirely neglect the first. Therefore, at the same
           time that we lie, we are immediately prepared to show how it
           is demonstrated that lying is not right.

           52. Upon all occasions we ought to have these maxims ready at
           hand:

             "Conduct me, Jove, and you, 0 Destiny,
             Wherever your decrees have fixed my station." [Cleanthes]
             "I follow cheerfully; and, did I not,
             Wicked and wretched, I must follow still

   Whoever yields properly to Fate, is deemed
   Wise among men, and knows the laws of heaven." [Euripides, Frag. 965]
   And this third:

     "0 Crito, if it thus pleases the gods, thus let it be. Anytus and
     Melitus may kill me indeed, but hurt me they cannot." [Plato's
     Crito and Apology]
     
      Greeting.

           Let no one be slow to seek wisdom when he is young nor weary
           in the search thereof when he is grown old. For no age is too
           early or too late for the health of the soul. And to say that
           the season for studying philosophy has not yet come, or that
           it is past and gone, is like saying that the season for
           happiness is not yet or that it is now no more. Therefore,
           both old and young ought to seek wisdom, the former in order
           that, as age comes over him, he may be young in good things
           because of the grace of what has been, and the latter in order
           that, while he is young, he may at the same time be old,
           because he has no fear of the things which are to come. So we
           must exercise ourselves in the things which bring happiness,
           since, if that be present, we have everything, and, if that be
           absent, all our actions are directed toward attaining it.

           Those things which without ceasing I have declared to you,
           those do, and exercise yourself in those, holding them to be
           the elements of right life. First believe that God is a living
           being immortal and happy, according to the notion of a god
           indicated by the common sense of humankind; and so of him
           anything that is at agrees not with about him whatever may
           uphold both his happyness and his immortality. For truly there
           are gods, and knowledge of them is evident; but they are not
           such as the multitude believe, seeing that people do not
           steadfastly maintain the notions they form respecting them.
           Not the person who denies the gods worshipped by the
           multitude, but he who affirms of the gods what the multitude
           believes about them is truly impious. For the utterances of
           the multitude about the gods are not true preconceptions but
           false assumptions; hence it is that the greatest evils happen
           to the wicked and the greatest blessings happen to the good
           from the hand of the gods, seeing that they are always
           favorable to their own good qualities and take pleasure in
           people like to themselves, but reject as alien whatever is not
           of their kind.

           Accustom yourself to believe that death is nothing to us, for
           good and evil imply awareness, and death is the privation of
           all awareness; therefore a right understanding that death is
           nothing to us makes the mortality of life enjoyable, not by
           adding to life an unlimited time, but by taking away the
           yearning after immortality. For life has no terror; for those
           who thoroughly apprehend that there are no terrors for them in
           ceasing to live. Foolish, therefore, is the person who says
           that he fears death, not because it will pain when it comes,
           but because it pains in the prospect. Whatever causes no
           annoyance when it is present, causes only a groundless pain in
           the expectation. Death, therefore, the most awful of evils, is
           nothing to us, seeing that, when we are, death is not come,
           and, when death is come, we are not. It is nothing, then,
           either to the living or to the dead, for with the living it is
           not and the dead exist no longer. But in the world, at one
           time people shun death as the greatest of all evils, and at
           another time choose it as a respite from the evils in life.
           The wise person does not deprecate life nor does he fear the
           cessation of life. The thought of life is no offense to him,
           nor is the cessation of life regarded as an evil. And even as
           people choose of food not merely and simply the larger
           portion, but the more pleasant, so the wise seek to enjoy the
           time which is most pleasant and not merely that which is
           longest. And he who admonishes the young to live well and the
           old to make a good end speaks foolishly, not merely because of
           the desirability of life, but because the same exercise at
           once teaches to live well and to die well. Much worse is he
           who says that it were good not to be born, but when once one
           is born to pass with all speed through the gates of Hades. For
           if he truly believes this, why does he not depart from life?
           It were easy for him to do so, if once he were firmly
           convinced. If he speaks only in mockery, his words are
           foolishness, for those who hear believe him not.

           We must remember that the future is neither wholly ours nor
           wholly not ours, so that neither must we count upon it as
           quite certain to come nor despair of it as quite certain not
           to come.

           We must also reflect that of desires some are natural, others
           are groundless; and that of the natural some are necessary as
           well as natural, and some natural only. And of the necessary
           desires some are necessary if we are to be happy, some if the
           body is to be rid of uneasiness, some if we are even to live.
           He who has a clear and certain understanding of these things
           will direct every preference and aversion toward securing
           health of body and tranquillity of mind, seeing that this is
           the sum and end of a happy life. For the end of all our
           actions is to be free from pain and fear, and, when once we
           have attained all this, the tempest of the soul is laid;
           seeing that the living creature has no need to go in search of
           something that is lacking, nor to look anything else by which
           the good of the soul and of the body will be fulfilled. When
           we are pained pleasure, then, and then only, do we feel the
           need of pleasure. For this reason we call pleasure the alpha
           and omega of a happy life. Pleasure is our first and kindred
           good. It is the starting-point of every choice and of every
           aversion, and to it we come back, inasmuch as we make feeling
           the rule by which to judge of every good thing. And since
           pleasure is our first and native good, for that reason we do
           not choose every pleasure whatever, but often pass over many
           pleasures when a greater annoyance ensues from them. And often
           we consider pains superior to pleasures when submission to the
           pains for a long time brings us as a consequence a greater
           pleasure. While therefore all pleasure because it is naturally
           akin to us is good, not all pleasure is worthy of choice, just
           as all pain is an evil and yet not all pain is to be shunned.
           It is, however, by measuring one against another, and by
           looking at the conveniences and inconveniences, teat all these
           matters must be judged. Sometimes we treat the good as an
           evil, and the evil, on the contrary, as a good. Again, we
           regard. independence of outward things as a great good, not so
           as in all cases to use little, but so as to be contented with
           little if we have not much, being honestly persuaded that they
           have the sweetest enjoyment of luxury who stand least in need
           of it, and that whatever is natural is easily procured and
           only the vain and worthless hard to win. Plain fare gives as
           much pleasure as a costly diet, when one the pain of want has
           been removed, while bread an water confer the highest possible
           pleasure when they are brought to hungry lips. To habituate
           one's se therefore, to simple and inexpensive diet supplies al
           that is needful for health, and enables a person to meet the
           necessary requirements of life without shrinking and it places
           us in a better condition when we approach at intervals a
           costly fare and renders us fearless of fortune.

           When we say, then, that pleasure is the end and aim, we do not
           mean the pleasures of the prodigal or the pleasures of
           sensuality, as we are understood to do by some through
           ignorance, prejudice, or willful misrepresentation. By
           pleasure we mean the absence of pain in the body and of
           trouble in the soul. It is not an unbroken succession of
           drinking-bouts and of merrymaking, not sexual love, not the
           enjoyment of the fish and other delicacies of a luxurious
           table, which produce a pleasant life; it is sober reasoning,
           searching out the grounds of every choice and avoidance, and
           banishing those beliefs through which the greatest
           disturbances take possession of the soul. Of all this the d is
           prudence. For this reason prudence is a more precious thing
           even than the other virtues, for ad a life of pleasure which
           is not also a life of prudence, honor, and justice; nor lead a
           life of prudence, honor, and justice, which is not also a life
           of pleasure. For the virtues have grown into one with a
           pleasant life, and a pleasant life is inseparable from them.

           Who, then, is superior in your judgment to such a person? He
           holds a holy belief concerning the gods, and is altogether
           free from the fear of death. He has diligently considered the
           end fixed by nature, and understands how easily the limit of
           good things can be reached and attained, and how either the
           duration or the intensity of evils is but slight. Destiny
           which some introduce as sovereign over all things, he laughs
           to scorn, affirming rather that some things happen of
           necessity, others by chance, others through our own agency.
           For he sees that necessity destroys responsibility and that
           chance or fortune is inconstant; whereas our own actions are
           free, and it is to them that praise and blame naturally
           attach. It were better, indeed, to accept the legends of the
           gods than to bow beneath destiny which the natural
           philosophers have imposed. The one holds out some faint hope
           that we may escape if we honor the gods, while the necessity
           of the naturalists is deaf to all entreaties. Nor does he hold
           chance to be a god, as the world in general does, for in the
           acts of a god there is no disorder; nor to be a cause, though
           an uncertain one, for he believes that no good or evil is
           dispensed by chance to people so as to make life happy, though
           it supplies the starting-point of great good and great evil.
           He believes that the misfortune of the wise is better than the
           prosperity of the fool. It is better, in short, that what is
           well judged in action should not owe its successful issue to
           the aid of chance.

           Exercise yourself in these and kindred precepts day and night,
           both by yourself and with him who is like to you; then never,
           either in waking or in dream, will you be disturbed, but will
           live as a god among people. For people lose all appearance of
           mortality by living in the midst of immortal blessings.
           
           1. A happy and eternal being has no trouble himself and brings no trouble upon any other being; hence he is exempt from movements of anger and partiality, for every such movement implies weakness

2. Death is nothing to us; for the body, when it has been resolved into its elements, has no feeling, and that which has no feeling is nothing to us.

3. The magnitude of pleasure reaches its limit in the removal of all pain. When pleasure is present, so long as it is uninterrupted, there is no pain either of body or of mind or of both together.

4. Continuous pain does not last long in the body; on the contrary, pain, if extreme, is present a short time, and even that degree of pain which barely outweighs pleasure in the body does not last for many days together. Illnesses of long duration even permit of an excess of pleasure over pain in the body.

5. It is impossible to live a pleasant life without living wisely and well and justly, and it is impossible to live wisely and well and justly without living pleasantly. Whenever any one of these is lacking, when, for instance, the person is not able to live wisely, though he lives well and justly, it is impossible for him to live a pleasant life.

6. In order to obtain security from other people any means whatever of procuring this was a natural good.

7. Some people have sought to become famous and renowned, thinking that thus they would make themselves secure against their fellow-humans. If, then, the life of such persons really was secure, they attained natural good; if, however, it was insecure, they have not attained the end which by nature's own prompting they originally sought.

8. No pleasure is in itself evil, but the things which produce certain pleasures entail annoyances many times greater than the pleasures themselves.

9. If all pleasure had been capable of accumulation, -- if this had gone on not only be recurrences in time, but all over the frame or, at any rate, over the principal parts of human nature, there would never have been any difference between one pleasure and another, as in fact there is.

10. If the objects which are productive of pleasures to profligate persons really freed them from fears of the mind, -- the fears, I mean, inspired by celestial and atmospheric phenomena, the fear of death, the fear of pain; if, further, they taught them to limit their desires, we should never have any fault to find with such persons, for they would then be filled with pleasures to overflowing on all sides and would be exempt from all pain, whether of body or mind, that is, from all evil.

11. If we had never been molested by alarms at celestial and atmospheric phenomena, nor by the misgiving that death somehow affects us, nor by neglect of the proper limits of pains and desires, we should have had no need to study natural science.

12. It would be impossible to banish fear on matters of the highest importance, if a person did not know the nature of the whole universe, but lived in dread of what the legends tell us. Hence without the study of nature there was no enjoyment of unmixed pleasures.

13. There would be no advantage in providing security against our fellow humans, so long as we were alarmed by occurrences over our heads or beneath the earth or in general by whatever happens in the boundless universe.

14. When tolerable security against our fellow humans is attained, then on a basis of power sufficient to afford supports and of material prosperity arises in most genuine form the security of a quiet private life withdrawn from the multitude.

15. Nature's wealth at once has its bounds and is easy to procure; but the wealth of vain fancies recedes to an infinite distance.

16. Fortune but seldom interferes with the wise person; his greatest and highest interests have been, are, and will be, directed by reason throughout the course of his life.

17. The just person enjoys. the greatest peace of mind, while the unjust is full of the utmost disquietude.

18. Pleasure in the body admits no increase when once the pain of want has been removed; after that it only admits of variation. The limit of pleasure in the mind, however, is reached when we reflect on the things themselves and their congeners which cause the mind the greatest alarms.

19. Unlimited time and limited time afford an equal amount of pleasure, if we measure the limits of that pleasure by reason.

20. The body receives as unlimited the limits of pleasure; and to provide it requires unlimited time. But the mind, grasping in thought what the end and limit of the body is, and banishing the terrors of futurity, procures a complete and perfect life, and has no longer any need of unlimited time. Nevertheless it does not shun pleasure, and even in the hour of death, when ushered out of existence by circumstances, the mind does not lack enjoyment of the best life.

21. He who understands the limits of life knows how easy it is to procure enough to remove the pain of want and make the whole of life complete and perfect. Hence he has no longer any need of things which are not to be won save by labor and conflict.

22. We must take into account as the end all that really exists and all clear evidence of sense to which we refer our opinions; for otherwise everything will be full of uncertainty and confusion.

23. If you fight against all your sensations, you will have no standard to which to refer, and thus no means of judging even those judgments which you pronounce false.

24. If you reject absolutely any single sensation without stopping to discriminate with respect to that which awaits confirmation between matter of opinion and that which is already present, whether in sensation or in feelings or in any immediate perception of the mind, you will throw into confusion even the rest of your sensations by your groundless belief and so you will be rejecting the standard of truth altogether. If in your ideas based upon opinion you hastily affirm as true all that awaits confirmation as well as that which does not, you will not escape error, as you will be maintaining complete ambiguity whenever it is a case of judging between right and wrong opinion.

25. If you do not on every separate occasion refer each of your actions to the end prescribed by nature, but instead of this in the act of choice or avoidance swerve aside to some other end, your acts will not be consistent with your theories.

26. All such desires as lead to no pain when they remain ungratified are unnecessary, and the longing is easily got rid of, when the thing desired is difficult to procure or when the desires seem likely to produce harm.

27. Of all the means which are procured by wisdom to ensure happiness throughout the whole of life, by far the most important is the acquisition of friends.

28. The same conviction which inspires confidence that nothing we have to fear is eternal or even of long duration, also enables us to see that even in our limited conditions of life nothing enhances our security so much as friendship.

29. Of our desires some are natural and necessary others are natural, but not necessary; others, again, are neither natural nor necessary, but are due to illusory opinion.

30. Those natural desires which entail no pain when not gratified, though their objects are vehemently pursued, are also due to illusory opinion; and when they are not got rid of, it is not because of their own nature, but because of the person's illusory opinion.

31. Natural justice is a symbol or expression of usefullness, to prevent one person from harming or being harmed by another.

32. Those animals which are incapable of making covenants with one another, to the end that they may neither inflict nor suffer harm, are without either justice or injustice. And those tribes which either could not or would not form mutual covenants to the same end are in like case.

33. There never was an absolute justice, but only an agreement made in reciprocal association in whatever localities now and again from time to time, providing against the infliction or suffering of harm.

34. Injustice is not in itself an evil, but only in its consequence, viz. the terror which is excited by apprehension that those appointed to punish such offenses will discover the injustice.

35. It is impossible for the person who secretly violates any article of the social compact to feel confident that he will remain undiscovered, even if he has already escaped ten thousand times; for right on to the end of his life he is never sure he will not be detected.

36. Taken generally, justice is the same for all, to wit, something found useful in mutual association; but in its application to particular cases of locality or conditions of whatever kind, it varies under different circumstances.

37. Among the things accounted just by conventional law, whatever in the needs of mutual association is attested to be useful, is thereby stamped as just, whether or not it be the same for all; and in case any law is made and does not prove suitable to the usefulness of mutual association, then this is no longer just. And should the usefulness which is expressed by the law vary and only for a time correspond with the prior conception, nevertheless for the time being it was just, so long as we do not trouble ourselves about empty words, but look simply at the facts.

38. Where without any change in circumstances the conventional laws, when judged by their consequences, were seen not to correspond with the notion of justice, such laws were not really just; but wherever the laws have ceased to be useful in consequence of a change in circumstances, in that case the laws were for the time being just when they were useful for the mutual association of the citizens, and subsequently ceased to be just when they ceased to be useful.

39. He who best knew how to meet fear of external foes made into one family all the creatures he could; and those he could not, he at any rate did not treat as aliens; and where he found even this impossible, he avoided all association, and, so far as was useful, kept them at a distance.

40. Those who were best able to provide themselves with the means of security against their neighbors, being thus in possession of the surest guarantee, passed the most agreeable life in each other's society; and their enjoyment of the fullest intimacy was such that, if one of them died before his time, the survivors did not mourn his death as if it called for sympathy.

JUDGING from what you tell me and from what I hear, I feel that you show great
promise. You do not tear from place to place and unsettle yourself with one move after another.
Restlessness of that sort is symptomatic of a sick mind. Nothing, to my way of thinking, is a
better proof of a well ordered mind than a mans ability to stop just where he is and pass some
time in his own company.
Be careful, however, that there is no element of discursiveness and desultoriness about
this reading you refer to, this reading of many different authors and books of every description.
You should be extending your stay among writers whose genius is unquestionable, deriving
constant nourishment from them if you wish to gain anything from your reading that will find a
lasting place in your mind. To be everywhere is to be nowhere. People who spend their whole
life travelling abroad end up having plenty of places where they can find hospitality but no real
friendships. The same must needs be the case with people who never set about acquiring an
intimate acquaintanceship with any one great writer, but skip from one to another, paying flying
visits to them all. Food that is vomited up as soon as it is eaten is not assimilated into the body
and does not do one any good; nothing hinders a cure so much as frequent changes of treatment;
a wound will not heal over if it is being made the subject of experiments with different
ointments; a plant which is frequently moved never grows strong. Nothing is so useful that it can
be of any service in the mere passing. A multitude of books only gets in ones way. So if you are
unable to read all the books in your possession, you have enough when you have all the books
you are able to read. And if you say, But I feel like opening different books at different times,
my answer will be this: tasting one dish after another is the sign of a fussy stomach, and where
the foods are dissimilar and diverse in range they lead to contamination of the system, not
nutrition. So always read well-tried authors, and if at any moment you find yourself wanting a
change from a particular author, go back to ones you have read before.
Each day, too, acquire something which will help you to face poverty, or death, and other
ills as well. After running over a lot of different thoughts, pick out one to be digested thoroughly
that day. This is what I do myself; out of the many bits I have been reading I, lay hold of one.
My thought for today is something which I found in Epicurus (yes, I actually make a practice of
going over to the enemys camp  by way of reconnaissance, not as a deserter!). A cheerful
poverty, he says, is an honourable state. But if it is cheerful it is not poverty at all. It is not the
man who has too little who is poor, but the one who hankers after more. What difference does it
make how much there is laid away in a mans safe or in his barns, how many head of stock he
grazes or how much capital he puts out at interest, if he is always after what is anothers and only
counts what he has yet to get, never what he has already. You ask what is the proper limit to a
persons wealth? First, having what is essential, and second, having what is enough.
LETTER III
YOU have sent me a letter by the hand of a friend of yours, as you call him. And in the
next sentence you warn me to avoid discussing your affairs freely with him, since you are not
even in the habit of doing so yourself; in other words you have described him as being a friend 
and then denied this, in one and the same letter. Now if you were using that word in a kind of
popular sense and not according to its strict meaning, and calling him a friend in much the
same way as we refer to candidates as gentlemen or hail someone with the greeting my dear
fellow if when we meet him his name slips our memory, we can let this pass. But if you are
looking on anyone as a friend when you do not trust him as you trust yourself, you are making a
grave mistake, and have failed to grasp sufficiently the full force of true friendship.
Certainly you should discuss everything with a friend; but before you do so, discuss in
your mind the man himself. After friendship is formed you must trust, but before that you must
judge. Those people who, contrary to Theophrastus advice, judge a man after they have made
him their friend instead of the other way round, certainly put the cart before the horse. Think for
a long time whether or not you should admit a given person to your friendship. But when you
have decided to do so, welcome him heart and soul, and speak as unreservedly with him as you
would with yourself. You should, I need hardly say, live in such a way that there is nothing
which you could not as easily tell your enemy as keep to yourself; but seeing that certain matters
do arise on which convention decrees silence, the things you should share with your friend are all
your worries and deliberations. Regard him as loyal, and you will make him loyal. Some mens
fear of being deceived has taught people to deceive them; by their suspiciousness they give them
the right to do the wrong thing by them. Why should I keep back anything when Im with a
friend? Why shouldnt I imagine Im alone when Im in his company?
There are certain people who tell any person they meet things that should only be
confided to friends, unburdening themselves of whatever is on their minds into any ear they
please. Others again are shy of confiding in their closest friends, and would not even let
themselves, if they could help it, into the secrets they keep hidden deep down inside themselves.
We should do neither. Trusting everyone is as much a fault as trusting no one (though I should
call the first the worthier and the second the safer behaviour).
Similarly, people who never relax and people who are invariably in a relaxed state merit
your disapproval  the former as much as the latter. For a delight in bustling about is not industry
 it is only the restless energy of a hunted mind. And the state of mind that looks on all activity
as tiresome is not true repose, but a spineless inertia. This prompts me to memorize something
which I came across in Pomponius. Some men have shrunk so far into dark corners that objects
in bright daylight seem quite blurred to them. A balanced combination of the two attitudes is
what we want; the active man should be able to take things easily, while the man who is inclined
towards repose should be capable of action. Ask nature: she will tell you that she made both day
and night.
LETTER V
I VIEW with pleasure and approval the way you keep on at your studies and sacrifice
everything to your single-minded efforts to make yourself every day a better man. I do not
merely urge you to persevere in this; I actually implore you to. Let me give you, though, this one
piece of advice: refrain from following the example of those whose craving is for attention, not
their own improvement, by doing certain things which are calculated to give rise to comment on
your appearance or way of living generally. Avoid shabby attire, long hair, an unkempt beard, an
outspoken dislike of silverware, sleeping on the ground and all other misguided means to
self-advertisement. The very name of philosophy, however modest the manner in which it is
pursued, is unpopular enough as it is: imagine what the reaction would be if we started
dissociating ourselves from the conventions of society. Inwardly everything should be different 
but our outward face should conform with the crowd. Our clothes should not be gaudy, yet they
should not be dowdy either. We should not keep silver plate with inlays of solid gold, but at the
same time we should not imagine that doing without gold and silver is proof that we are leading
the simple life. Let our aim be a way of life not diametrically opposed to, but better than that of
the mob. Otherwise we shall repel and alienate the very people whose reform we desire; we shall
make them, moreover, reluctant to imitate us in anything for fear they may have to imitate us in
everything. The first thing philosophy promises us is the feeling of fellowship, of belonging to
mankind and being members of a community; being different will mean the abandoning of that
manifesto. We must watch that the means by which we hope to gain admiration do not earn
ridicule and hostility. Our motto, as everyone knows, is to live in conformity with nature: it is
quite contrary to nature to torture ones body, to reject simple standards of cleanliness and make
a point of being dirty, to adopt a diet that is not just plain but hideous and revolting. In the same
way as a craving for dainties is a token of extravagant living, avoidance of familiar and
inexpensive dishes betokens insanity. Philosophy calls for simple living, not for doing penance,
and the simple way of life need not be a crude one. The standard which I accept is this: ones life
should be a compromise between the ideal and the popular morality. People should admire our
way of life but they should at the same time find it understandable.
Does that mean we are to act just like other people? Is there to be no distinction between
us and them? Most certainly there is. Any close observer should be aware that we are different
from the mob. Anyone entering our homes should admire us rather than our furnishings. It is a
great man that can treat his earthenware as if it was silver, and a man who treats his silver as if it
was earthenware is no less great. Finding wealth an intolerable burden is the mark of an unstable
mind.
But let me share with you as usual the days small find (which today is something that I
noticed in the Stoic writer Hecato). Limiting ones desires actually helps to cure one of fear.
Cease to hope, he says, and you will cease to fear. But how, you will ask, can things as
diverse as these be linked? Well, the fact is, Lucilius, that they are bound up with one another,
unconnected as they may seem. Widely different though they are, the two of them march in
unison like a prisoner and the escort he is handcuffed to. Fear keeps pace with hope. Nor does
their so moving together surprise me; both belong to a mind in suspense, to a mind in a state of
anxiety through looking into the future. Both are mainly due to projecting our thoughts far ahead
of us instead of adapting ourselves to the present. Thus it is that foresight, the greatest blessing
humanity has been given, is transformed into a curse. Wild animals run from the dangers they
actually see, and once they have escaped them worry no more. We however are tormented alike
by what is past and what is to come. A number of our blessings do us harm, for memory brings
back the agony of fear while foresight brings it on prematurely. No one confines his unhappiness
to the present.
LETTER VI
I SEE in myself, Lucilius, not just an improvement but a transformation, although I
would not venture as yet to assure you, or even to hope, that there is nothing left in me needing
to be changed. Naturally there are a lot of things about me requiring to be built up or fined down
or eliminated. Even this, the fact that it perceives the failings it was unaware of in itself before, is
evidence of a change for the better in ones character. In the case of some sick people it is a
matter for congratulation when they come to realize for themselves that they are sick.
I should very much like, then, to share this all so sudden metamorphosis of mine with 
you. Doing so would make me start to feel a surer faith in the friendship that exists between us,
that true friendship which not hope nor fear nor concern for personal advantage ever sunders,
that friendship in which and for which people are ready to die. I can give you plenty of examples
of people who have not been lacking a friend but friendship, something that can never happen
when mutual inclination draws two personalities together in a fellowship of desire for all that is
honourable. Why cannot it happen? Because they know that everything  and especially their
setbacks  is shared between them.
You cant imagine how much of an alteration I see each day bringing about in me. Send
me, too, you will be saying, the things youve found so effectual. Indeed I desire to transfer
every one of them to you; part of my joy in learning is that it puts me in a position to teach;
nothing, however outstanding and however helpful, will ever give me any pleasure if the
knowledge is to be for my benefit alone. If wisdom were offered me on the one condition that I
should keep it shut away and not divulge it to anyone, I should reject it. There is no enjoying the
possession of anything valuable unless one has someone to share it with. I shall send you,
accordingly, the actual books themselves, and to save you a lot of trouble hunting all over the
place for passages likely to be of use to you, I shall mark the passages so that you can turn
straight away to the words I approve and admire.
Personal converse, though, and daily intimacy with someone will be of more benefit to
you than any discourse. You should really be here and on the spot, firstly because people believe
their eyes rather more than their ears, and secondly because the road is a long one if one
proceeds by way of precepts but short and effectual if by way of personal example. Cleanthes
would never have been the image of Zeno if he had merely heard him lecture; he lived with him,
studied his private life, watched him to see if he lived in accordance with his own principle.
Plato, Aristotle and a host of other philosophers all destined to take different paths, derived more
from Socrates character than from his words. It was not Epicurus school but living under the
same roof as Epicurus that turned Metrodorus, Hermarchus and Polyaenus into great men. And
yet I do not summon you to my side solely for the sake of your own progress but for my own as
well, for we shall be of the utmost benefit to each other.
Meanwhile, since I owe you the daily allowance, Ill tell you what took my fancy in the
writings of Hecato today. What progress have I made? I am beginning to be my own friend.
That is progress indeed. Such a person will never be alone, and you may be sure he is a friend of
all.
LETTER VII
YOU ask me to say what you should consider it particularly important to avoid. My
answer is this: a mass crowd. It is something to which you cannot entrust yourself yet without
risk. I at any rate am ready to confess my own frailty in this respect. I never come back home
with quite the same moral character I went out with; something or other becomes unsettled
where I had achieved internal peace, some one or other of the things I had put to flight reappears
on the scene. We who are recovering from a prolonged spiritual sickness are in the same
condition as invalids who have been affected to such an extent by prolonged indisposition that
they cannot once be taken out of doors without ill effects. Associating with people in large
numbers is actually harmful: there is not one of them that will not make some vice or other
attractive to us, or leave us carrying the imprint of it or bedaubed all unawares with it. And
inevitably enough, the larger the size of the crowd we mingle with, the greater the danger. But
nothing is as ruinous to the character as sitting away ones time at a show  for it is then, through 
the medium of entertainment, that vices creep into one with more than usual ease. What do you
take me to mean? That I go home more selfish, more self-seeking and more self-indulgent? Yes,
and what is more, a person crueller and less humane through having been in contact with human
beings. I happened to go to one of these shows at the time of the lunch-hour interlude, expecting
there to be some light and witty entertainment then, some respite for the purpose of affording
peoples eyes a rest from human blood. Far from it. All the earlier contests were charity in
comparison. The nonsense is dispensed with now: what we have now is murder pure and simple.
The combatants have nothing to protect them; their whole bodies are exposed to the blows; every
thrust they launch gets home. A great many spectators prefer this to the ordinary matches and
even to the special, popular demand ones. And quite naturally. There are no helmets and no
shields repelling the weapons. What is the point of armour? Or of skill? All that sort of thing just
makes the death slower in coming. In the morning men are thrown to the lions and the bears: but
it is the spectators they are thrown to in the lunch hour. The spectators insist that each on killing
his man shall be thrown against another to be killed in his turn; and the eventual victor is
reserved by them for some other form of butchery; the only exit for the contestants is death. Fire
and steel keep the slaughter going. And all this happens while the arena is virtually empty.
But he was a highway robber, he killed a man. And what of it? Granted that as a
murderer he deserved this punishment, what have you done, you wretched fellow, to deserve to
watch it? Kill him! Flog him! Burn him! Why does he run at the other mans weapon in such a
cowardly way? Why isnt he less half-hearted about killing? Why isnt he a bit more enthusiastic
about dying? Whip him forward to get his wounds! Make them each offer the other a bare breast
and trade blow for blow on them. And when there is an interval in the show: Lets have some
throats cut in the meantime, so that theres something happening! Come now, I say, surely you
people realize  if you realize nothing else  that bad examples have a way of recoiling on those
who set them? Give thanks to the immortal gods that the men to whom you are giving a lesson in
cruelty are not in a position to profit from it.
When a mind is impressionable and has none too firm a hold on what is right, it must be
rescued from the crowd: it is so easy for it to go over to the majority. A Socrates, a Cato or a
Laelius might have been shaken in his principles by a multitude of people different from himself:
such is the measure of the inability of any of us, even as we perfect our personalitys adjustment,
to withstand the onset of vices when they come with such a mighty following. A single example
of extravagance or greed does a lot of harm  an intimate who leads a pampered life gradually
makes one soft and flabby; a wealthy neighbour provokes cravings in one; a companion with a
malicious nature tends to rub off some of his rust even on someone of an innocent and
open-hearted nature  what then do you imagine the effect on a persons character is when the
assault comes from the world at large? You must inevitably either hate or imitate the world. But
the right thing is to shun both courses: you should neither become like the bad because they are
many, nor be an enemy of the many because they are unlike you. Retire into yourself as much as
you can. Associate with people who are likely to improve you. Welcome those whom you are
capable of improving. The process is a mutual one: men learn as they teach. And there is no
reason why any pride in advertising your talents abroad should lure you forward into the public
eye, inducing you to give readings of your works or deliver lectures. I should be glad to see you
doing that if what you had to offer them was suitable for the crowd I have been talking about: but
the fact is, not one of them is really capable of understanding you. You might perhaps come
across one here and there, but even they would need to be trained and developed by you to a
point where they could grasp your teaching. For whose benefit, then, did I learn it all? If it was 
for your own benefit that you learnt it you have no call to fear that your trouble may have been
wasted.
Just to make sure that I have not been learning solely for my own benefit today, let me
share with you three fine quotations I have come across, each concerned with something like the
same idea  one of them is by way of payment of the usual debt so far as this letter is concerned,
and the other two you are to regard as an advance on account. To me, says Democritus, a
single man is a crowd, and a crowd is a single man. Equally good is the answer given by the
person, whoever it was (his identity is uncertain), who when asked what was the object of all the
trouble he took over a piece of craftsmanship when it would never reach more than a very few
people, replied: A few is enough for me; so is one; and so is none. The third is a nice
expression used by Epicurus in a letter to one of his colleagues. I am writing this, he says, not
for the eyes of the many, but for yours alone: for each of us is audience enough for the other.
Lay these up in your heart, my dear Lucilius, that you may scorn the pleasure that comes from
the majoritys approval. The many speak highly of you, but have you really any grounds for
satisfaction with yourself if you are the kind of person the many understand? Your merits should
not be outward facing.
LETTER VIII
ARE you, of all people, you write, really telling me to avoid the crowd, to retire from
the world and find contentment in a good conscience? Where are those Stoic rules of yours that
call on a man to die in harness? Come now, do I really give you the impression that I advocate a
life of inactivity? I have only buried myself away behind closed doors in order to be able to be of
use to more people. With me no day is ever whiled away at ease. I claim a good part of my
nights for study; I have no time for sleep: I just succumb to it, keeping my eyes at their work
when they are heavy-lidded and exhausted from lack of rest. I have withdrawn from affairs as
well as from society, and from my own affairs in particular: I am acting on behalf of later
generations. I am writing down a few things that may be of use to them; I am committing to
writing some helpful recommendations, which might be compared to the formulae of successful
medications, the effectiveness of which I have experienced in the case of my own sores, which
may not have been completely cured but have at least ceased to spread. I am pointing out to
others the right path, which I have recognized only late in life, when I am worn out with my
wanderings. Avoid, I cry, whatever is approved of by the mob, and things that are the gift of
chance. Whenever circumstance brings some welcome thing your way, stop in suspicion and
alarm: wild animals and fish alike are taken in by this or that inviting prospect. Do you look on
them as presents given you by fortune? They are snares. Anyone among you who wishes to lead
a secure life will do his very best to steer well wide of these baited bounties, which comprise yet
another instance of the errors we miserable creatures fall into: we think these things are ours
when in fact it is we who are caught. That track leads to precipices; life on that giddy level ends
in a fall. Once, moreover, prosperity begins to carry us off course, we are no more capable even
of bringing the ship to a standstill than of going down with the consolation that she has been held
on her course, or of going down once and for all; fortune does not just capsize the boat: she hurls
it headlong on the rocks and dashes it to pieces. Cling, therefore, to this sound and wholesome
plan of life: indulge the body just so far as suffices for good health. It needs to be treated
somewhat strictly to prevent it from being disobedient to the spirit. Your food should appease
your hunger, your drink quench your thirst, your clothing keep out the cold, your house be a
protection against inclement weather. It makes no difference whether it is built of turf or of 
variegated marble imported from another country: what you have to understand is that thatch
makes a person just as good a roof as gold does. Spurn everything that is added on by way of
decoration and display by unnecessary labour. Reflect that nothing merits admiration except the
spirit, the impressiveness of which prevents it from being impressed by anything.
If these are the things Im saying to myself, if these are the things Im saying to future
generations, dont you think Im doing more good than when I go into court to enter into a
recognizance on someones behalf, or stamp my seal on a will, or lend my assistance by word or
action in the Senate to some candidate for office? Those who appear inactive are, believe me,
engaged in far more important activity; theyre dealing with matters divine and human at the
same moment.
But the time has come to make an end, and in accordance with the practice Ive started to
make some disbursement on this letters behalf. For this I shall not draw on my own resources.
Im still turning over the pages of Epicurus, and the following saying, one I read today, comes
from him: To win true freedom you must be a slave to philosophy. A person who surrenders
and subjects himself to her doesnt have his application deferred from day to day; hes
emancipated on the spot, the very service of philosophy being freedom.
Quite possibly youll be demanding to know why Im quoting so many fine sayings from
Epicurus rather than ones belonging to our own school. But why should you think of them as
belonging to Epicurus and not as common property? Think how many poets say things that
philosophers have said  or ought to have said! Not to mention the tragedians or our native
Roman drama (which has a serious element in it as well and stands halfway between comedy and
tragedy), think of the quantity of brilliant lines to be found lying about in farces alone! Think of
the number of Publilius verses that really ought to be spoken by actors wearing the tragic
buskins instead of barefooted pantomime actors! Ill quote one verse of his which belongs to
philosophy, and the same facet of philosophy that I was occupied with just now, a verse in which
he proclaims that gifts which chance brings our way are not to be regarded as possessions:
If you pray a thing may
And it does come your way,
Tis a long way from being your own.
I recall your expressing the same idea a good deal more happily and succinctly:
What fortune has made yours is not your own.
And I cant pass over that even happier expression of yours:
The boon that could be given can be withdrawn.
(This being from your own stock, Im not debiting it to your account!)
LETTER IX
YOU desire to know whether Epicurus is right in one of his letters in criticizing those
who maintain that the wise man is content with himself and therefore needs no friend. This is
what Epicurus objects to in Stilbo and those* who believe that the supreme ideal in life is a mind
devoid of feeling or as we say impatiens. We are bound to involve ourselves in ambiguity if we
try to express in a single word the meaning of the Greek term apatheia by transferring it straight
into our word impatientia. For it may be understood in the opposite sense to the one we wish,
with people taking it to signify the man who is unable to endure anything that goes badly for him
instead of what we mean by it, the man who refuses to allow anything that goes badly for him to
affect him. Consider then whether it might not be preferable to call it a mind that is
invulnerable or above all suffering.
The difference here between the Epicurean and our own school is this: our wise man feels
his troubles but overcomes them, while their wise man does not even feel them. We share with
them the belief that the wise man is content with himself. Nevertheless, self-sufficient though he
is, he still desires a friend, a neighbour, a companion. Notice how self-contented he is: on
occasion such a man is content with a mere partial self  if he loses a hand as a result of war or
disease, or has one of his eyes, or even both, put out in an accident, he will be satisfied with what
remains of himself and be no less pleased with his body now that it is maimed and incomplete
than he was when it was whole. But while he does not hanker after what he has lost, he does
prefer not to lose them. And this is what we mean when we say the wise man is self-content; he
is so in the sense that he is able to do without friends, not that he desires to do without them.
When I speak of his being able to do this, what I am saying in fact amounts to this: he bears the
loss of a friend with equanimity.
Not that he will then be without a friend, for it is his to decide how soon he makes good
the loss. Just as Phidias can carve another statue straight away if he loses one, so our wise man
with his skill in the art of making friends will fill the place of someone he has lost. I suppose you
will want to know how he will be able to make a friend so quickly. Well, I shall tell you
(provided we agree that I may make this the moment to pay my debt and square my account so
far as this letter is concerned). I shall show you, said Hecato, a love philtre compounded
without drug or herb or witchs spell. It is this: if you wish to be loved, love.
Great pleasure is to be found not only in keeping up an old and established friendship but
also in beginning and building up a new one. There is the same difference between having
gained a friend and actually gaining a friend as there is between a farmer harvesting and a farmer
sowing. The philosopher Attalus used to say that it was more of a pleasure to make a friend than
to have one, in the same way as an artist derives more pleasure from painting than from having
completed a picture. When his whole attention is absorbed in concentration on the work he is
engaged on, a tremendous sense of satisfaction is created in him by his very absorption. There is
never quite the same gratification after he has lifted his hand from the finished work. From then
on what he is enjoying is the arts end product, whereas it was the art itself that he enjoyed while
he was actually painting. So with our children, their growing up brings wider fruits but their
infancy was sweeter.
To come back to the question, the wise man, self-sufficient as he is, still desires to have a
friend if only for the purpose of practising friendship and ensuring that those talents are not idle.
Not, as Epicurus put it in the same letter, for the purpose of having someone to come and sit
beside his bed when he is ill or come to his rescue when he is hard up or thrown into chains, but
so that on the contrary he may have someone by whose sickbed he himself may sit or whom he
may himself release when that person is held prisoner by hostile hands. Anyone thinking of his
own interests and seeking out friendship with this in view is making a great mistake. Things will
end as they began; he has secured a friend who is going to come to his aid if captivity threatens:
at the first clank of a chain that friend will disappear. These are what are commonly called
fair-weather friendships. A person adopted as a friend for the sake of his usefulness will be
cultivated only for so long as he is useful. This explains the crowd of friends that clusters about
successful men and the lonely atmosphere about the ruined  their friends running away when it
comes to the testing point; it explains the countless scandalous instances of people deserting or
betraying others out of fear for themselves. The ending inevitably matches the beginning: a
person who starts being friends with you because it pays him will similarly cease to be friends
because it pays him to do so. If there is anything in a particular friendship that attracts a man 
other than the friendship itself, the attraction of some reward or other will counterbalance that of
the friendship. What is my object in making a friend? To have someone to be able to die for,
someone I may follow into exile, someone for whose life I may put myself up as security and
pay the price as well. The thing you describe is not friendship but a business deal, looking to the
likely consequences, with advantage as its goal. There can be no doubt that the desire lovers have
for each other is not so very different from friendship  you might say it was friendship gone
mad. Well, then, does anyone ever fall in love with a view to a profit, or advancement, or
celebrity? Actual love in itself, heedless of all other considerations, inflames peoples hearts with
a passion for the beautiful object, not without the hope, too, that the affection will be mutual.
How then can the nobler stimulus of friendship be associated with any ignoble desire?
You may say we are not at present concerned with the question whether friendship is
something to be cultivated for its own sake. But this, on the contrary, is exactly what needs
proving most; for if friendship is something to be sought out for its own sake, the self-contented
man is entitled to pursue it. And how does he approach it? In the same way as he would any
object of great beauty, not drawn by gain, not out of alarm at the vicissitudes of fortune. To
procure friendship only for better and not for worse is to rob it of all its dignity.
The wise man is content with himself. A lot of people, Lucilius, put quite the wrong
interpretation on this statement. They remove the wise man from all contact with the world
outside, shutting him up inside his own skin. We must be quite clear about the meaning of this
sentence and just how much it claims to say. It applies to him so far as happiness in life is
concerned: for this all he needs is a rational and elevated spirit that treats fortune with disdain;
for the actual business of living he needs a great number of things. I should like to draw your
attention to a similar distinction made by Chrysippus. The wise man, he said, lacked nothing but
needed a great number of things, whereas the fool, on the other hand, needs nothing (for he does
not know how to use anything) but lacks everything. The wise man needs hands and eyes and a
great number of things that are required for the purposes of day-to-day life; but he lacks nothing,
for lacking something implies that it is a necessity and nothing, to the wise man, is a necessity.
Self-contented as he is, then, he does need friends  and wants as many of them as
possible  but not to enable him to lead a happy life; this he will have even without friends. The
supreme ideal does not call for any external aids. It is homegrown, wholly self-developed. Once
it starts looking outside itself for any part of itself it is on the way to being dominated by fortune.
But what sort of life, people may say, will the wise man have if he is going to be left
without any friends when he is thrown into prison or stranded among foreigners or detained in
the course of a voyage in distant parts or cast away on some desert shore? It will be like that of
Jove while nature takes her rest, of brief duration, when the universe is dissolved and the gods
are all merged in one, finding repose in himself, absorbed in his own thoughts. Such is more or
less the way of the wise man: he retires to his inner self, is his own company. So long in fact as
he remains in a position to order his affairs according to his own judgement, he remains
self-content even when he marries, even when he brings up his children. He is self-content and
yet he would refuse to live if he had to live without any human company at all. Natural
promptings (not thoughts of any advantage to himself) impel him towards friendship. We are
born with a sense of the pleasantness of friendship just as of other things. In the same way as
there exists in man a distaste for solitude and a craving for society, natural instinct drawing one
human being to another, so too with this there is something inherent in it that stimulates us into
seeking friendships. The wise man, nevertheless, unequalled though he is in his devotion to his
friends, though regarding them as being no less important and frequently more important than his 
own self, will still consider what is valuable in life to be something wholly confined to his inner
self. He will repeat the words of Stilbo (the Stilbo whom Epicurus letter attacks), when his
home town was captured and he emerged from the general conflagration, his children lost, his
wife lost, alone and none the less a happy man, and was questioned by Demetrius. Asked by this
man, known, from the destruction he dealt out to towns, as Demetrius the City Sacker, whether
he had lost anything, he replied, I have all my valuables with me. There was an active and
courageous man  victorious over the very victory of the enemy! I have lost, he said, nothing.
He made Demetrius wonder whether he had won a victory after all. All my possessions, he
said, are with me, meaning by this the qualities of a just, a good and an enlightened character,
and indeed the very fact of not regarding as valuable anything that is capable of being taken
away. We are impressed at the way some creatures pass right through fire without physical harm:
how much more impressive is the way this man came through the burning and the bloodshed and
the ruins uninjured and unscathed. Does it make you see how much easier it can be to conquer a
whole people than to conquer a single man? Those words of Stilbos are equally those of the
Stoic. He too carries his valuables intact through cities burnt to ashes, for he is contented with
himself. This is the line he draws as the boundary for his happiness.
In case you imagine that we Stoics are the only people who produce noble sayings, let me
tell you something  see that you put this down to my credit, even though I have already settled
my account with you for today  Epicurus himself, who has nothing good to say for Stilbo, has
uttered a statement quite like this one of Stilbos. Any man, he says, who does not think that
what he has is more than ample, is an unhappy man, even if he is the master of the whole world.
Or if you prefer to see it expressed like this (the point being that we should be ruled not by the
actual words used but by the sense of them), a man is unhappy, though he reign the world over,
if he does not consider himself supremely happy. To show you, indeed, that these are sentiments
of a universal character, prompted, evidently, by nature herself, you will find the following verse
in a comic poet:
Not happy he who thinks himself not so.*
What difference does it make, after all, what your position in life is if you dislike it
yourself?
What about so-and-so, you may ask, who became rich in such a despicable manner, or
such-and-such a person who gives orders to a great many people but is at the mercy of a great
many more? Supposing they say they are happy, will their own opinions to this effect make them
happy? It does not make any difference what a man says; what matters is how he feels, and not
how he feels on one particular day but how he feels at all times. But you have no need to fear
that so valuable a thing may fall into unworthy hands. Only the wise man is content with what is
his. All foolishness suffers the burden of dissatisfaction with itself.
LETTER XI
I HAVE had a conversation with your talented friend. From the very beginning of his talk
with me it was apparent what considerable gifts of character and intelligence he possesses. He
gave me a foretaste of his capabilities, to which he will certainly live up, for the things he said,
caught as he was quite off his guard, were entirely unrehearsed. As he was recovering his
self-possession, he could scarcely get over his embarrassment  always a good sign in a young
man  so deep had the blush been that suffused his face. This I rather suspect will remain with
him even when he has built up his character and stripped it of all weakness  even when he has
become a wise man. For no amount of wisdom enables one to do away with physical or mental 
weaknesses that arise from natural causes; anything inborn or ingrained in one can by dint of
practice be allayed, but not overcome. When they face a crowd of people some men, even ones
with the stoutest of hearts, break into the sort of sweat one usually sees on persons in an
overheated and exhausted state; some men experience a trembling at the knees when they are
about to speak; some a chattering of the teeth, a stuttering tongue or stammering lips. These are
things which neither training nor experience ever eliminates. Nature just wields her power and
uses the particular weakness to make even the strongest conscious of her. One of these things I
well know is a blush, which has a habit of suddenly reddening the faces of men of even the most
dignified demeanour. It is of course more noticeable in the young, with their hotter blood and
sensitive complexions; nevertheless seasoned men and ageing men alike are affected by it. Some
men are more to be feared on the occasions when they flush than at any other time  as if in so
doing they let loose all their inhibitions; Sulla was at his wildest when the blood had rushed to
his visage. No features were more susceptible than Pompeys: he never failed to blush in
company, and particularly at public meetings. I remember Fabianus blushing when he appeared
to give evidence before the Senate, and this bashfulness looked wonderfully well on him. When
this happens it is not due to some mental infirmity, but to the unfamiliarity of some situation or
other, which may not necessarily strike any alarm into inexperienced people but does produce a
reaction in them if they are thus liable through having a natural, physical predisposition to it;
certain people have good, ordinary blood and others just have an animated, lively sort of blood
that comes to the face quickly.
No amount of wisdom, as I said before, ever banishes these things; otherwise  if she
eradicated every weakness  wisdom would have dominion over the world of nature. Ones
physical make-up and the attributes that were ones lot at birth remain settled no matter how
much or how long the personality may strive after perfect adjustment. One cannot ban these
things any more than one can call them up. The tokens used to portray embarrassment by
professional actors, those actors who portray emotion, simulate unhappiness and reproduce for us
fear and apprehension, are a hanging of the head, a dropping of the voice, a casting down of the
eyes and keeping them fixed on the ground; a blush is something they can never manage to
reproduce; it is something that will neither be summoned up nor be told to stay away. Against
these things philosophy holds out no remedy and avails one nothing; they are quite independent;
they come unbidden, they go unbidden.
My letter calls for a conclusion. Heres one for you, one that will serve you in good stead,
too, which Id like you to take to heart. We need to set our affections on some good man and
keep him constantly before our eyes, so that we may live as if he were watching us and do
everything as if he saw what we were doing. This, my dear Lucilius, is Epicurus advice, and in
giving it he has given us a guardian and a moral tutor  and not without reason, either: misdeeds
are greatly diminished if a witness is always standing near intending doers. The personality
should be provided with someone it can revere, someone whose influence can make even its
private, inner life more pure. Happy the man who improves other people not merely when he is
in their presence but even when he is in their thoughts! And happy, too, is the person who can so
revere another as to adjust and shape his own personality in the light of recollections, even, of
that other. A person able to revere another thus will soon deserve to be revered himself. So
choose yourself a Cato  or, if Cato seems too severe for you, a Laelius, a man whose character
is not quite so strict. Choose someone whose way of life as well as words, and whose very face
as mirroring the character that lies behind it, have won your approval. Be always pointing him
out to yourself either as your guardian or as your model. There is a need, in my view, for 
someone as a standard against which our characters can measure themselves. Without a ruler to
do it against you wont make the crooked straight.
LETTER XII
WHEREVER I turn I see fresh evidence of my old age. I visited my place just out of
Rome recently and was grumbling about the expense of maintaining the building, which was in a
dilapidated state. My manager told me the trouble wasnt due to any neglect on his part: he was
doing his utmost but the house was old. That house had taken shape under my own hands; whats
to become of me if stones of my own age are crumbling like that? Losing my temper I seized at
the first excuse that presented itself for venting my irritation on him. Its quite clear, I said,
that these plane trees are being neglected. Theres no foliage on them. Look at those knotty,
dried-up branches and those wretched, flaking trunks. That wouldnt happen if someone dug
round them and watered them. He swore by my guardian angel he was doing his utmost: in
everything his care was unremitting but the poor things were just old. Between you and me, now,
I had planted them myself and seen the first leaf appearing on them myself. Then, turning
towards the front door, I said: Whos that? Whos that decrepit old person? The doors the
proper place for him all right  he looks as if hes on the way out. Where did you get him from?
What was the attraction in taking over someone elses dead for burial? Whereupon the man said,
Dont you recognize me? Im Felicio. You used to bring me toy figures.* Im the son of the
manager Philositus, your pet playmate. The mans absolutely crazy, I said. Become a little
child again, has he, actually calls himself my playmate? Well, the way hes losing his teeth at
this very moment, its perfectly possible.
So I owe it to this place of mine near town that my old age was made clear to me at every
turn. Well, we should cherish old age and enjoy it. It is full of pleasure if you know how to use it.
Fruit tastes most delicious just when its season is ending. The charms of youth are at their
greatest at the time of its passing. It is the final glass which pleases the inveterate drinker, the one
that sets the crowning touch on his intoxication and sends him off into oblivion. Every pleasure
defers till its last its greatest delights. The time of life which offers the greatest delight is the age
that sees the downward movement  not the steep decline  already begun; and in my opinion
even the age that stands on the brink has pleasures of its own  or else the very fact of not
experiencing the want of any pleasures takes their place. How nice it is to have outworn ones
desires and left them behind!
Its not very pleasant, though, you may say, to have death right before ones eyes. To
this I would say, firstly, that death ought to be right there before the eyes of a young man just as
much as an old one  the order in which we each receive our summons is not determined by our
precedence in the register  and, secondly, that no one is so very old that it would be quite
unnatural for him to hope for one more day.*
Every day, therefore, should be regulated as if it were the one that brings up the rear, the
one that rounds out and completes our lives. Pacuvius, the man who acquired a right to Syria by
prescription,53 was in the habit of conducting a memorial ceremony for himself with wine and
funeral feasting of the kind we are familiar with, and then being carried on a bier from the dinner
table to his bed, while a chanting to music went on of the words He has lived, he has lived in
Greek, amid the applause of the young libertines present. Never a day passed but he celebrated
his own funeral. What he did from discreditable motives we should do from honourable ones,
saying in all joyfulness and cheerfulness as we retire to our beds,
I have lived; I have completed now the course
That fortune long ago allotted me.*
If God adds the morrow we should accept it joyfully. The man who looks for the morrow
without worrying over it knows a peaceful independence and a happiness beyond all others.
Whoever has said I have lived receives a windfall every day he gets up in the morning.
But I must close this letter now. What! youll be saying. Is it coming to me just as it is,
without any parting contribution? Dont worry, its bringing you something. Why did I call it
something, though? Its a great deal. For what could be more splendid than the following
saying which Im entrusting to this letter of mine for delivery to you: To live under constraint is
a misfortune, but there is no constraint to live under constraint. Of course not, when on every
side there are plenty of short and easy roads to freedom there for the taking. Let us thank God
that no one can be held a prisoner in life  the very constraints can be trampled under foot.
It was Epicurus who said that, you protest. What business have you got with someone
elses property? Whatever is true is my property. And I shall persist in inflicting Epicurus on
you, in order to bring it home to the people who take an oath of allegiance to someone and never
afterwards consider what is being said but only who said it, that the things of greatest merit are
common property.
LETTER XV
OUR ancestors had a custom, observed right down as far as my own lifetime, of adding
to the opening words of a letter: I trust this finds you as it leaves me, in good health. We have
good reason to say: I trust this finds you in pursuit of wisdom. For this is precisely what is
meant by good health. Without wisdom the mind is sick, and the body itself, however physically
powerful, can only have the kind of strength that is found in persons in a demented or delirious
state. So this is the sort of healthiness you must make your principal concern. You must attend to
the other sort as well, but see that it takes second place. It wont cost you any great trouble if
good health is all you want. For it is silly, my dear Lucilius, and no way for an educated man to
behave, to spend ones time exercising the biceps, broadening the neck and shoulders and
developing the lungs. Even when the extra feeding has produced gratifying results and youve
put on a lot of muscle, youll never match the strength or the weight of a prize ox. The greater
load, moreover, on the body is crushing to the spirit and renders it less active. So keep the body
within bounds as much as you can and make room for the spirit. Devotees of physical culture
have to put up with a lot of nuisances. There are the exercises, in the first place, the toil involved
in which drains the vitality and renders it unfit for concentration or the more demanding sort of
studies. Next there is the heavy feeding, which dulls mental acuteness. Then there is the taking
on as coaches of the worst brand of slave, persons who divide their time between putting on
lotion and putting down liquor, whose idea of a well spent day consists of getting up a good
sweat and then replacing the fluid lost with plenty of drink, all the better to be absorbed on a dry
stomach. Drinking and perspiring  its the life of a dyspeptic! There are short and simple
exercises which will tire the body without undue delay and save what needs especially close
accounting for, time. There is running, swinging weights about and jumping  either
high-jumping or long-jumping or the kind indulged in by the priests of Mars, if one may so
describe it, or to be rather more disrespectful, by the laundress. Pick out any of these for ease and
straightforwardness. But whatever you do, return from body to mind very soon. Exercise it day
and night. Only a moderate amount of work is needed for it to thrive and develop. It is a form of
exercise to which cold and heat and even old age are no obstacle. Cultivate an asset which the
passing of time itself improves.
Im not telling you to be always bent over book or writing-tablets. The mind has to be
given some time off, but in such a way that it may be refreshed, not relaxed till it goes to pieces.
Travelling in ones carriage shakes the body up and doesnt interfere with intellectual pursuits;
you can read, dictate, speak, or listen  nor does walking, for that matter, preclude any of these
activities. Nor need you look down on voice-training, though I will not have you practising any
of this ascending and then descending again by degrees through set scales  if you start that,
youll be going on to take lessons in walking! Once let into your house the sort of person that
hunger teaches unheard-of occupations and youll have someone regulating the way you walk
and watching the way you use your jaws as you eat, and in fact going just as far as your patience
and credulity lead his audacity on. Are you to conclude from what Ive just said that your voice
should start its exercises with immediate shouting at full force? The natural thing is to lead up to
it through easy stages, so natural in fact that even persons involved in a quarrel begin in
conversational tones: only later do they go on to rend the air. No one makes an impassioned
appeal for the help and support of all true men of Rome at the very outset. * Our purpose in
all this is not to give the voice, exercise, but to make it give us exercise.
I have relieved you, then, of no little bother. To these favours there shall be added the
following small contribution, a striking maxim that comes from Greece. Here it is: The life of
folly is empty of gratitude, full of anxiety: it is focused wholly on the future. Who said that?
you ask. The same man as before. And what sort of life do you think is meant by the life of
folly? Babas and Isios? No, he means our own life, precipitated by blind desire into activities
that are likely to bring us harm and will certainly never bring us satisfaction  if they could ever
satisfy us they would have done so by now  never thinking how pleasant it is to ask for nothing,
how splendid it is to be complete and be independent of fortune. So continually remind yourself,
Lucilius, of the many things you have achieved. When you look at all the people out in front of
you, think of all the ones behind you. If you want to feel appreciative where the gods and your
life are concerned, just think how many people youve outdone. Why be concerned about others,
come to that, when youve outdone your own self? Set yourself a limit which you couldnt even
exceed if you wanted to, and say good-bye at last to those deceptive prizes more precious to
those who hope for them than to those who have won them. If there were anything substantial in
them they would sooner or later bring a sense of fullness; as it is they simply aggravate the thirst
of those who swallow them. Away with pomp and show; as for the uncertain lot that the future
has in store for me, why should I demand from fortune that she should give me this and that
rather than demand from myself that I should not ask for them? Why should I ask for them, after
all? Am I to pile them up in total forgetfulness of the frailty of human existence? What is the
purpose of my labours going to be? See, this days my last  or maybe it isnt, but its not so far
away from it.
LETTER XVI
IT is clear to you, I know, Lucilius, that no one can lead a happy life, or even one that is
bearable, without the pursuit of wisdom, and that the perfection of wisdom is what makes the
happy life, although even the beginnings of wisdom make life bearable. Yet this conviction, clear
as it is, needs to be strengthened and given deeper roots through daily reflection; making noble
resolutions is not as important as keeping the resolutions you have made already. You have to
persevere and fortify your pertinacity until the will to good becomes a disposition to good. So
you neednt go in for all this long-winded protestation or say any more on the subject  Im well
aware that youve made a great deal of progress. I realize the feelings that prompt you to put 
these things in your letter, and there is no pretence or speciousness about them. But  to give you
my honest opinion  at this stage, although I have great hopes of you, I do not yet feel quite
confident about you. And I should like you to adopt the same attitude: youve no grounds for
forming a ready, hasty belief in yourself. Carry out a searching analysis and close scrutiny of
yourself in all sorts of different lights. Consider above all else whether youve advanced in
philosophy or just in actual years.
Philosophy is not an occupation of a popular nature, nor is it pursued for the sake of
self-advertisement. Its concern is not with words, but with facts. It is not carried on with the
object of passing the day in an entertaining sort of way and taking the boredom out of leisure. It
moulds and builds the personality, orders ones life, regulates ones conduct, shows one what
one should do and what one should leave undone, sits at the helm, and keeps one on the correct
course as one is tossed about in perilous seas. Without it no one can lead a life free of fear or
worry. Every hour of the day countless situations arise that call for advice, and for that advice we
have to look to philosophy.
Someone may say: What help can philosophy be to me if there is such a thing as fate?
What help can philosophy be if there is a deity controlling all? What help can it be if all is
governed by chance? For it is impossible either to change what is already determined or to make
preparations to meet what is undetermined; either, in the first case, my planning is forestalled by
a God who decrees how I am to act, or, in the second case, it is fortune that allows me no
freedom to plan. Whichever of these alternatives, Lucilius, is true  even if all of them are true 
we still need to practise philosophy. Whether we are caught in the grasp of an inexorable law of
fate, whether it is God who as lord of the universe has ordered all things, or whether the affairs
of mankind are tossed and buffeted haphazardly by chance, it is philosophy that has the duty of
protecting us. She will encourage us to submit to God with cheerfulness and to fortune with
defiance; she will show you how to follow God and bear what chance may send you. But I
mustnt pass on here to a discussion of the problem what is within our control if there is a
governing providence, whether we are carried along enmeshed in a train of fated happenings, or
whether we are at the mercy of the sudden and the unforeseeable. For the present I go back to the
point where I was before, to advise and urge you not to allow your spiritual enthusiasm to cool
off or fall away. Keep a hold on it and put it on a firm footing, so that what is at present an
enthusiasm may become a settled spiritual disposition.
If I know you, youll have been looking around from the very start of this letter to see
what its going to bring you by way of a little present. Search the letter and youll find it. You
neednt think my kindness all that remarkable: I am only being generous, still, with someone
elses property. Why, though, do I call it someone elses? Whatever is well said by anyone
belongs to me. Here is another saying of Epicurus: If you shape your life according to nature,
you will never be poor; if according to peoples opinions, you will never be rich. Natures wants
are small, while those of opinion are limitless. Imagine that youve piled, up all that a veritable
host of rich men ever possessed, that fortune has carried you far beyond the bounds of wealth so
far as any private individual is concerned, building you a roof of gold and clothing you in royal
purple, conducting you to such a height of opulence and luxury that you hide the earth with
marble floors  putting you in a position not merely to own, but to walk all over treasures 
throw in sculptures, paintings, all that has been produced at tremendous pains by all the arts to
satisfy extravagance: all these things will only induce in you a craving for even bigger things.
Natural desires are limited; those which spring from false opinions have nowhere to stop, for
falsity has no point of termination. When a person is following a track, there is an eventual end 
to it somewhere, but with wandering at large there is no limit. So give up pointless, empty
journeys, and whenever you want to know whether the desire aroused in you by something you
are pursuing is natural or quite unseeing, ask yourself whether it is capable of coming to rest at
any point; if after going a long way there is always something remaining farther away, be sure it
is not something natural.
LETTER XVIII
IT is the month of December, and yet the whole city is in a sweat! Festivity at state
expense is given unrestricted licence. Everywhere there echoes the noise of preparations on a
massive scale. It all suggests that the Saturnalia* holidays are different from the ordinary
working day, when the difference is really non-existent  so much so in fact that the man who
said that December used to be a month but is now a year was, in my opinion, not far wide of the
mark!
If I had you with me I should enjoy consulting you and finding out what course you think
we should follow: should we make no alteration in our daily habits, or should we take off our
togas  time was when a change from formal wear would come about only during periods of
grave political upheaval, whereas with us it happens for holidays and pleasures sake!  and
have dinner parties with a note of gaiety about them, to avoid giving the impression that we
disagree with the ways of those around us? If I know you as well as I think I do and you had to
give a decision in the matter, you would say that we should be neither altogether like nor
altogether unlike the festive-hatted crowd. But perhaps this is the very season when we should be
keeping the soul under strict control, making it unique in abstaining from pleasure just when the
crowd are all on pleasure bent. If the soul succeeds in avoiding either heading or being carried
away in the direction of the temptations that lead people into extravagant living, no surer proof
of its strength of purpose can be vouchsafed it. Remaining dry and sober takes a good deal more
strength of will when everyone about one is puking drunk; it takes a more developed sense of
fitness, on the other hand, not to make of oneself a person apart, to be neither indistinguishable
from those about one nor conspicuous by ones difference, to do the same things but not in quite
the same manner. For a holiday can be celebrated without extravagant festivity.
Still, my determination to put your moral strength of purpose to the test is such that I
propose to give even you the following direction found in great mens teaching: set aside now
and then a number of days during which you will be content with the plainest of food, and very
little of it, and with rough, coarse clothing, and will ask yourself, Is this what one used to
dread? It is in times of security that the spirit should be preparing itself to deal with difficult
times; while fortune is bestowing favours on it then is the time for it to be strengthened against
her rebuffs. In the midst of peace the soldier carries out manoeuvres, throws up earthworks
against a non-existent enemy and tires himself out with unnecessary toil in order to be equal to it
when it is necessary. If you want a man to keep his head when the crisis comes you must give
him some training before it comes. This was the aim of the men* who once every month
pretended they were poor, bringing themselves face to face with want, to prevent their ever being
terrified by a situation which they had frequently rehearsed.
You must not at this point imagine that I mean meals like Timons or the poor mans
room or anything else to which the extravagance of wealth resorts to amuse away its tedium.
That pallet must be a real one, and the same applies to your smock, and your bread must be hard
and grimy. Endure all this for three or four days at a time, sometimes more, so that it is a genuine
trial and not an amusement. At the end of it, believe me, Lucilius, you will revel in being sated 
for a penny, and will come to see that security from care is not dependent on fortune  for even
when she is angry she will always let us have what is enough for our needs.
There is no reason, mind you, why you should suppose yourself to be performing a
considerable feat in doing this  you will only be doing something done by thousands upon
thousands of slaves and paupers. But take credit on one account, that you will be doing it of your
own free choice  and finding it no more difficult to endure on a permanent basis than to try out
once in a while. We should be practising with a dummy target, getting to be at home with
poverty so that fortune cannot catch us unprepared. We shall be easier in our minds when rich if
we have come to realize how far from burdensome it is to be poor. The great hedonist teacher
Epicurus used to observe certain periods during which he would be niggardly in satisfying his
hunger, with the object of seeing to what extent, if at all, one thereby fell short of attaining full
and complete pleasure, and whether it was worth going to much trouble to make the deficit good.
At least so he says in the letter he wrote to Polyaenus in the year Charinus was in office. He
boasts in it indeed that he is managing to feed himself for less than a halfpenny whereas
Metrodorus, not yet having made such good progress, needs a whole halfpenny! Do you think
such fare can do no more than fill a person up? It can fill him with pleasure as well, and not the
kind of insubstantial, fleeting pleasure that needs constant renewal but a pleasure which is sure
and lasting. Barley porridge, or a crust of barley bread, and water do not make a very cheerful
diet, but nothing gives one keener pleasure than the ability to derive pleasure even from that 
and the feeling of having arrived at something which one cannot be deprived of by any unjust
stroke of fortune. Prison rations are more generous: the man in the condemned cell is not so
scantily fed as that by the executioner; to reduce oneself, then, of ones own free choice to a diet
that no man has any real call to be apprehensive about even if he is sentenced to death, that is an
act of real spiritual greatness. To do this is truly to forestall the blows of fortune. So, my dear
Lucilius, start following these mens practice and appoint certain days on which to give up
everything and make yourself at home with next to nothing. Start cultivating a relationship with
poverty.
Dear guest, be bold enough to pay no heed
To riches, and so make yourself, like him,
Worthy of a god.*
For no one is worthy of a god unless he has paid no heed to riches. I am not, mind you,
against your possessing them, but I want to ensure that you possess them without tremors; and
this you will only achieve in one way, by convincing yourself that you can live a happy life even
without them, and by always regarding them as being on the point of vanishing.
But its time I started folding up this letter. Not till youve settled your account, you
say. Well, Ill refer you to Epicurus for payment. Anger carried to excess begets madness. How
true this is youre bound to know, having had both slaves and enemies. It is a passion, though,
which flares up against all types of people. It is born of love as well as hate, and is as liable to
arise in the course of sport or jesting as in affairs of a serious kind. The factor that counts is not
the importance of the cause from which it springs but the kind of personality it lands in, in the
same way as with fire what matters is not the fierceness of the flame but where it catches  solid
objects may resist the fiercest flame while, conversely, dry and inflammable matter will nurse a
mere spark into a conflagration. It is true, my dear Lucilius. The outcome of violent anger is a
mental raving, and therefore anger is to be avoided not for the sake of moderation but for the
sake of sanity.
LETTER XXVI
ITs only a short time since I was telling you I was in sight of old age. Now Im afraid I
may have left old age behind me altogether. Some other term would be more in keeping now
with my years, or at least my present physical state, since old age connotes a period of decline,
not debility. Put me in the list of the decrepit, the ones on the very brink! However, I
congratulate myself, mind you, on the fact that my age has not, so far as Im aware, brought any
deterioration in my spirit, conscious as I am of the deterioration in my constitution. Only my
vices and their accessories have decayed: the spirit is full of life, and delighted to be having only
limited dealings with the body. It has thrown off a great part of its burden. Its full of vigour, and
carrying on an argument with me on the subject of old age, maintaining that these are its finest
years. Lets accept what it says, and let it make the most of its blessings. It tells me to start
thinking and examine how far I owe this serenity and sobriety to philosophy, and how far I owe
it simply to my years, and to investigate with some care what things I really am refusing to do
and what Im simply incapable of doing  and its prepared to accept whatever Im really pleased
to find myself incapable of doing as equivalent to refusing to do them; and what cause can there
be for complaint, after all, in anything that was always bound to come to an end fading gradually
away? What is troubling about that? Nothing, you may say, could be more troubling than the
idea of our wasting and perishing away  melting out of existence, one may aptly call it, since we
arent struck down all of a sudden but worn away, every day that passes diminishing in some
degree our powers. Moving to ones end through natures own gentle process of dissolution  is
there a better way of leaving life than that? Not because there is anything wrong with a sudden,
violent departure, but because this gradual withdrawal is an easy route.
Anyway, heres what I do: I imagine to myself that the testing time is drawing near, that
the day that is going to see judgement pronounced on the whole of my past life has actually
arrived, and I take a look at myself and address myself in these terms: All that Ive done or said
up to now counts for nothing. My showing to date, besides being heavily varnished over, is of
paltry value and reliability as a guarantee of my spirit. Im going to leave it to death to settle
what progress Ive made. Without anxiety, then, Im making ready for the day when the tricks
and disguises will be put away and I shall come to a verdict on myself, determining whether the
courageous attitudes I adopt are really felt or just so many words, and whether or not the defiant
challenges Ive hurled at fortune have been mere pretence and pantomime. Away with the
worlds opinion of you  its always unsettled and divided. Away with the pursuits that have
occupied the whole of your life  death is going to deliver the verdict in your case. Yes, all your
debates and learned conferences, your scholarly talk and collection of maxims from the teachings
of philosophers, are in no way indicative of genuine spiritual strength. Bold words come even
from the timidest. Its only when youre breathing your last that the way youve spent your time
will become apparent. I accept the terms, and feel no dread of the coming judgement. Thats
what I say to myself, but assume that Ive said it to you as well. Youre younger than I am, but
what difference does that make? No count is taken of years. Just where death is expecting you is
something we cannot know; so, for your part, expect him everywhere.
I was just intending to stop, my hand considering its closing sentence, but the accounts
have still to be made out and this letter issued with its travelling expenses! You may assume that
I wont be announcing the source I intend borrowing from  you know whose funds Im drawing
on! Give me a fraction more time and payment will be made out of my own pocket. In the
meantime Epicurus will oblige me, with the following saying: Rehearse death, or  the idea
may come across to us rather more satisfactorily if put in this form  It is a very good thing to 
familiarize oneself with death. You may possibly think it unnecessary to learn something which
you will only have to put into practice once. That is the very reason why we ought to be
practising it. We must needs continually study a thing if we are not in a position to test whether
we know it. Rehearse death. To say this is to tell a person to rehearse his freedom. A person
who has learned how to die has unlearned how to be a slave. He is above, or at any rate beyond
the reach of, all political powers. What are prisons, warders, bars to him? He has an open door.
There is but one chain holding us in fetters, and that is our love of life. There is no need to cast
this love out altogether, but it does need to be lessened somewhat so that, in the event of
circumstances ever demanding this, nothing may stand in the way of our being prepared to do at
once what we must do at some time or other.
LETTER XXVII
SO youre giving me advice, are you? you say. Have you already given yourself
advice, then? Have you already put yourself straight? Is that how you come to have time for
reforming other people? No, Im not so shameless as to set about treating people when Im sick
myself. Im talking to you as if I were lying in the same hospital ward, about the illness were
both suffering from, and passing on some remedies. So listen to me as if I were speaking to
myself. Im allowing you access to my inmost self, calling you in to advise me as I have things
out with myself. I proclaim to my own self: Count your years and youll be ashamed to be
wanting and working for exactly the same things as you wanted when you were a boy. Of this
one thing make sure against your dying day  that your faults die before you do. Have done with
those unsettled pleasures, which cost one dear  they do one harm after theyre past and gone,
not merely when theyre in prospect. Even when theyre over, pleasures of a depraved nature are
apt to carry feelings of dissatisfaction, in the same way as a criminals anxiety doesnt end with
the commission of the crime, even if its undetected at the time. Such pleasures are insubstantial
and unreliable; even if they dont do one any harm, theyre fleeting in character. Look around for
some enduring good instead. And nothing answers this description except what the spirit
discovers for itself within itself. A good character is the only guarantee of everlasting, carefree
happiness. Even if some obstacle to this comes on the scene, its appearance is only to be
compared to that of clouds which drift in front of the sun without ever defeating its light.
How soon will you be fortunate enough to attain to this happiness? Well, you havent
been dragging your steps up till now, but your pace could be increased. Theres a lot of work
remaining to be done, and if you want to be successful you must devote all your waking hours
and all your efforts to the task personally. This is not something that admits of delegation. It is a
different branch of learning which has room for devilling. There was a rich man called Calvisius
Sabinus, in my own lifetime, who had a freedmans brains along with a freedmans fortune. I
have never seen greater vulgarity in a successful man. His memory was so bad that at one
moment or another the names of Ulysses, or Achilles, or Priam, characters he knew as well as we
knew our early teachers, would slip his memory. No doddering butler ever went through the
introductions of a mass of callers committing quite such solecisms  not announcing peoples
names so much as foisting names on them  as Sabinus did with the Greek and Trojan heroes.
But this didnt stop him wanting to appear a well-read man. And to this end he thought up the
following short cut: he spent an enormous amount of money on slaves, one of them to know
Homer by heart, another to know Hesiod, while he assigned one apiece to each of the nine lyric
poets.* That the cost was enormous is hardly surprising: not having found what he wanted in the
market he had them made to order. After this collection of slaves had been procured for him, he 
began to give his dinner guests nightmares. He would have these fellows at his elbow so that he
could continually be turning to them for quotations from these poets which he might repeat to the
company, and then  it happened frequently  he would break down halfway through a word.
Satellius Quadratus, who regarded stupid millionaires as fair game to be sponged off, and
consequently also fair game for flattery, as well as  and this goes with the other two things  fair
game for facetiousness at their expense, suggested to him that he should keep a team of scholars
to pick up the bits. On Sabinus letting it be known that the slaves had set him back a hundred
thousand sesterces apiece, he said: Yes, for less than that you could have bought the same
number of bookcases. Sabinus was none the less quite convinced that what anyone in his
household knew he knew personally. It was Satellius, again, who started urging Sabinus, a pale
and skinny individual whose health was poor, to take up wrestling.
When Sabinus retorted: How can I possibly do that? Its as much as I can do to stay
alive, Satellius answered: Now please, dont say that! Look how many slaves youve got in
perfect physical condition! A sound mind can neither be bought nor borrowed. And if it were
for sale, I doubt whether it would find a buyer. And yet unsound ones are being purchased every
day.
But let me pay you what I owe you and say goodbye. Poverty brought into accord with
the law of nature is wealth. Epicurus is constantly saying this in one way or another. But
something that can never be learnt too thoroughly can never be said too often. With some people
you only need to point to a remedy; others need to have it rammed into them.
LETTER XXVIII
DO you think you are the only person to have had this experience? Are you really
surprised, as if it were something unprecedented, that so long a tour and such diversity of scene
have not enabled you to throw off this melancholy and this feeling of depression? A change of
character, not a change of air, is what you need. Though you cross the boundless ocean, though,
to use the words of our poet Virgil,
Lands and towns are left astern,*
whatever your destination you will be followed by your failings. Here is what Socrates
said to someone who was making the same complaint: How can you wonder your travels do you
no good, when you carry yourself around with you? You are saddled with the very thing that
drove you away. How can novelty of surroundings abroad and becoming acquainted with
foreign scenes or cities be of any help? All that dashing about turns out to be quite futile. And if
you want to know why all this running away cannot help you, the answer is simply this: you are
running away in your own company. You have to lay aside the load on your spirit. Until you do
that, nowhere will satisfy you. Imagine your present state as being like that of the prophetess
whom our Virgil represents in a roused and excited state, largely taken over by a spirit not her
own:
The Sibyl raves about as one possessed,
In hopes she may dislodge the mighty god
Within her bosom.*
You rush hither and thither with the idea of dislodging a firmly seated weight when the
very dashing about just adds to the trouble it causes you  like the cargo in a ship, which does
not weigh her down unduly so long as it does not shift, but if it rolls more to one side than the
other it is liable to carry the side on which it settles down into the water. Whatever you do is bad
for you, the very movement in itself being harmful to you since you are in fact shaking up a sick 
man.
Once you have rid yourself of the affliction there, though, every change of scene will
become a pleasure. You may be banished to the ends of the earth, and yet in whatever outlandish
corner of the world you may find yourself stationed, you will find that place, whatever it may be
like, a hospitable home. Where you arrive does not matter so much as what sort of person you
are when you arrive there. We ought not, therefore, to give over our hearts for good to any one
part of the world. We should live with the conviction: I wasnt born for one particular corner:
the whole worlds my home country. If the truth of that were clear to you, you would not be
surprised that the diversity of new surroundings for which, out of weariness of the old, you are
constantly heading fails to do you any good. Whichever you first came to would have satisfied
you if you had believed you were at home in all. As it is, instead of travelling you are rambling
and drifting, exchanging one place for another when the thing you are looking for, the good life,
is available everywhere.
Could there be a scene of greater turmoil than the City? Yet even there, if need be, you
are free to lead a life of peace. Given a free choice of posting, though, I should flee a long way
from the vicinity, let alone the sight of the City. For in the same way as there are unpleasant
climates which are trying even to the most robust constitutions, there are others which are none
too wholesome for the mind, even though it be a sound one, when it is still in an imperfect state
and building up its strength. I do not agree with those who recommend a stormy life and plunge
straight into the breakers, waging a spirited struggle against wordly obstacles every day of their
lives. The wise man will put up with these things, not go out of his way to meet them; he will
prefer a state of peace to a state of war. It does not profit a man much to have managed to discard
his own failings if he must ever be at loggerheads with other peoples. Socrates, they will tell
you, had the Thirty Tyrants standing over him and yet they could not break his spirit. What
difference does it make how many masters a man has? Slavery is only one, and yet the person
who refuses to let the thought of it affect him is a free man no matter how great the swarm of
masters around him.
It is time I left off  not before I have paid the usual duty, though! A consciousness of
wrongdoing is the first step to salvation. This remark of Epicurus is to me a very good one. For
a person who is not aware that he is doing anything wrong has no desire to be put right. You
have to catch yourself doing it before you can reform. Some people boast about their failings:
can you imagine someone who counts his faults as merits ever giving thought to their cure? So 
to the best of your ability  demonstrate your own guilt, conduct inquiries of your own into all
the evidence against yourself. Play the part first of prosecutor, then of judge and finally of
pleader in mitigation. Be harsh with yourself at times.
LETTER XXXIII
You feel that my present letters should be like my earlier ones and have odd sayings of
leading Stoics appended to them. But they never busied themselves with philosophical gems.
Their whole system is too virile for that. When things stand out and attract attention in a work
you can be sure there is an uneven quality about it. One tree by itself never calls for admiration
when the whole forest rises to the same height. Poetry is replete with such things; so is history.
So please dont think them peculiar to Epicurus; they are general, and ours more than anyones,
although they receive more notice in him because they occur at widely scattered intervals,
because they are unlooked for, and because it is rather a surprise to find spirited sayings in a
person who  so most people consider  was an advocate of soft living. In my own view, 
Epicurus was actually, in spite of his long sleeves, a man of spirit as well. Courage, energy and a
warlike spirit are as commonly given to Persians as to people with a style of dress more suited to
action.
So theres no call for you to press for stock excerpts, seeing that the sort of thing which in
the case of other thinkers is excerpted is in our case continuous writing. Thats why we dont go
in for that business of window-dressing; we dont mislead the customer, so that when he enters
the shop he finds nothing in stock apart from the things on display in the window. We allow him
to pick up samples from wherever he likes. And suppose we did want to separate out individual
aphorisms from the mass, whom should we attribute them to? Zeno? Cleanthes? Chrysippus?
Panaetius? Posidonius? We Stoics are no monarchs subjects; each asserts his own freedom.
Among Epicureans whatever Hermarchus or Metrodorus says is credited to one man alone;
everything ever said by any member of that fraternity was uttered under the authority and
auspices of one person. I say again, then, that for us, try as we may, it is impossible to pick out
individual items from so vast a stock in which each thing is as good as the next.
The poor man tis that counts his flock.*
Wherever you look your eye will light on things that might stand out if everything around
them were not of equal standard.
So give up this hope of being able to get an idea of the genius of the greatest figures by so
cursory an approach. You have to examine and consider it as a whole. There is a sequence about
the creative process, and a work of genius is a synthesis of its individual features from which
nothing can be subtracted without disaster. I have no objection to your inspecting the
components individually provided you do so without detaching them from the personality they
actually belong to; a woman is not beautiful when her ankle or arm wins compliments, but when
her total appearance diverts admiration from the individual parts of her body.
Still, if you press me I wont treat you so meanly  openhanded generosity it shall be.
There is a mass of such things, an enormous mass of them, lying all over the place, needing only
to be picked up as distinct from gathered up. They come, not in dribs and drabs, but in a closely
interconnected and continuous stream. I have no doubt, too, they may be very helpful to the
uninitiated and those who are still novices, for individual aphorisms in a small compass, rounded
off in units rather like lines of verse, become fixed more readily in the mind. It is for this reason
that we give children proverbs and what the Greeks call chriae* to learn by heart, a childs mind
being able to take these in at a stage when anything more would be beyond its capacity. But in
the case of a grown man who has made incontestable progress it is disgraceful to go hunting after
gems of wisdom, and prop himself up with a minute number of the best-known sayings, and be
dependent on his memory as well; it is time he was standing on his own feet. He should be
delivering himself of such sayings, not memorizing them. It is disgraceful that a man who is old
or in sight of old age should have a wisdom deriving solely from his notebook. Zeno said this.
And what have you said? Cleanthes said that. What have you said? How much longer are you
going to serve under others orders? Assume authority yourself and utter something that may be
handed down to posterity. Produce something from your own resources.
This is why I look on people like this as a spiritless lot  the people who are forever
acting as interpreters and never as creators, always lurking in someone elses shadow. They
never venture to do for themselves the things they have spent such a long time learning. They
exercise their memories on things that are not their own. It is one thing, however, to remember,
another to know. To remember is to safeguard something entrusted to your memory, whereas to
know, by contrast, is actually to make each item your own, and not to be dependent on some 
original and be constantly looking to see what the master said. Zeno said this, Cleanthes that.
Lets have some difference between you and the books! How much longer are you going to be a
pupil? From now on do some teaching as well. Why, after all, should I listen to what I can read
for myself? The living voice, it may be answered, counts for a great deal. Not when it is just
acting in a kind of secretarial capacity, making itself an instrument for what others have to say.
A further point, too, is that these people who never attain independence follow the views
of their predecessors, first, in matters in which everyone else without exception has abandoned
the older authority concerned, and secondly, in matters in which investigations are still not
complete. But no new findings will ever be made if we rest content with the findings of the past.
Besides, a man who follows someone else not only does not find anything, he is not even
looking. But surely you are going to walk in your predecessors footsteps? Yes indeed, I shall
use the old road, but if I find a shorter and easier one I shall open it up. The men who poineered
the old routes are leaders, not our masters. Truth lies open to everyone. There has yet to be a
monopoly of truth. And there is plenty of it left for future generations too.
LETTER XXXVIII
You are quite right in urging that we should exchange letters oftener. The utmost benefit
comes from talk because it steals little by little into the mind. Lectures prepared beforehand and
delivered before a listening audience are more resounding but less intimate. Philosophy is good
advice, and no one gives advice at the top of his voice. Such harangues, if I may call them that,
may need to be resorted to now and then where a person in a state of indecision is needing a
push. But when the object is not to make him want to learn but to get him learning, one must
have recourse to these lower tones, which enter the mind more easily and stick in it. What is
required is not a lot of words but effectual ones.
Words need to be sown like seed. No matter how tiny a seed may be, when it lands in the
right sort of ground it unfolds its strength and from being minute expands and grows to a
massive size. Reason does the same; to the outward eye its dimensions may be insignificant, but
with activity it starts developing. Although the words spoken are few, if the mind has taken them
in as it should they gather strength and shoot upwards. Yes, precepts have the same features as
seeds: they are of compact dimensions and they produce impressive results  given, as I say, the
right sort of mind, to grasp at and assimilate them. The mind will then respond by being in its
turn creative and will produce a yield exceeding what was put into it.
LETTER XL
THANK you for writing so often. By doing so you give me a glimpse of yourself in the
only way you can. I never get a letter from you without instantly feeling were together. If
pictures of absent friends are a source of pleasure to us, refreshing the memory and relieving the
sense of void with a solace however insubstantial and unreal, how much more so are letters,
which carry marks and signs of the absent friend that are real. For the handwriting of a friend
affords us what is so delightful about seeing him again, the sense of recognition.
You say in your letter that you went and heard the philosopher Serapio when his ship put
in where you are. His words, you say, tend to be tumbled out at a tremendous pace, pounded
and driven along rather than poured out, for they come in a volume no one voice could cope
with. I do not approve of this in a philosopher, whose delivery  like his life  should be
well-ordered; nothing can be well-regulated if it is done in a breakneck hurry. That is why in
Homer the impetuous type of eloquence which he compares to snow that keeps on coming down 
without a break, is given to the orator, while from the old man there comes a gentle eloquence
that flowed sweeter than honey.* You should take the view, then, that this copious and
impetuous energy in a speaker is better suited to a hawker than to someone who deals with a
subject of serious importance and is also a teacher.
Yet I am just as much against his words coming in a trickle as in a stream. He should not
keep peoples ears on the stretch any more than he should swamp them. For the other extreme of
thinness and poverty means less attentiveness on the part of the listener as he becomes tired of
this slowness with all its interruptions. Nonetheless what is waited for does sink in more readily
than what goes flying past; one speaks in any event of instruction as being handed on to those
being taught, and something that escapes them is hardly being handed on.
Language, moreover, which devotes its attention to truth ought to be plain and
unadorned. This popular style has nothing to do with truth. Its object is to sway a mass audience,
to carry away unpractised ears by the force of its onslaught. It never submits itself to detailed
discussion, is just wafted away. Besides, how can a thing possibly govern others when it cannot
be governed itself? And apart from all this surely language which is directed to the healing of
mens minds needs to penetrate into one? Medicines do no good unless they stop some length of
time in one. There is, moreover, a great deal of futility and emptiness about this style of
speaking, which has more noise about it than effectiveness. There are my terrors to be quieted,
incitements to be quelled, illusions to be dispelled, extravagance to be checked, greed to be
reprimanded: which of these things can be done in a hurry? What doctor can heal patients merely
in passing? One might add, too, that there is not even any pleasure to be found in such a noisy
promiscuous torrent of words. Just as with a lot of things that one would never believe possible
one finds it quite enough to have seen them once proved possible, so with these performers with
words, to have heard them once is more than enough. What is there in them, after all, that anyone
could want to learn or imitate? What view is one likely to take of the state of a persons mind
when his speech is wild and incoherent and knows no restraint?
This rapidity of utterance recalls a person running down a slope and unable to stop where
he meant to, being carried on instead a lot farther than he intended, at the mercy of his bodys
momentum; it is out of control, and unbecoming to philosophy, which should be placing her
words, not throwing them around, and moving forward step by step. But surely she can move on
to a higher plane now and then as well? Certainly, but it must be without prejudice to her
dignity of character, and this vehement, excessive energy strips her of that. Power she should
have, great power, but it should be controlled: she should be a never-failing stream, not a spate.
Even in an advocate I should be loth to allow such uncontrollable speed in delivery, all in an
unruly rush; how could a judge (who is not uncommonly, too, inexperienced and unqualified) be
expected to keep up with it? Even on the occasions when an advocate is carried away by an
ungovernable passion or a desire to display his powers, he should not increase his pace and pile
on the words beyond the capacity of the ear.
You will be doing the right thing, therefore, if you do not go to listen to people who are
more concerned about the quantity than the quality of what they say, and choose yourself  if
you have to  to speak in the manner of Publius Vinicius. When Asellius was asked how
Vinicius spoke, he described it as being. at a slow pace. Geminus Varius in fact remarked,
How you can call the man eloquent I simply dont know  he cant string three words together.
Is there any reason why of the two you should not choose Vinicius style? You can expect to be
interrupted by persons with as little taste as the one who, when Vinicius was jerking the words
out one by one, as if he were dictating rather than speaking, exclaimed, I call on the speaker to 
speak. The pace of Quintus Haterius, a celebrated speaker of his day, is something I should have
a sensible man keep well clear of: with him there was never a hesitation or a pause, only one start
and only one stop.
But I also think that certain styles are suitable in a greater or lesser degree to different
nationalities. In a Greek one will tolerate this lack of discipline, while we have acquired the habit
of punctuating what we say, in writing as well as speech. Our own Cicero, too, from whom
Roman oratory really sprang, was a steady goer. Roman discourse is more given to
self-examination, appraising itself and inviting appraisal. Fabianus, who added outstanding
oratory to those more important distinctions of his, his way of life and his learning, would
discuss a subject with dispatch rather than with haste. You might describe his oratory as being
not rapid but fluent. This I am ready to see in a philosopher, but I do not insist on it; his delivery
is not to be halting, but I should rather have the words issued forth than flowing forth. And a
further reason I have for warning you against that disease is the fact that you can only acquire it
successfully if you cease to feel any sense of shame. You really need to give the skin of your
face a good rub and then not listen to yourself! For that unguarded pace will give rise to a lot of
expressions of which you would otherwise be critical. You cannot, I repeat, successfully acquire
it and preserve your modesty at the same time. One needs, moreover, constant daily practice for
it. It requires a switch of attention, too, from subject-matter to words. And even if it does
transpire that the words come readily to the tongue and are capable of reeling off it without any
effort on your part, they will still need to be regulated. A way of speaking which is restrained,
not bold, suits a wise man in the same way as an unassuming sort of walk does. The upshot, then,
of what I have to say is this: I am telling you to be a slow-speaking person.
LETTER XLI
YOU are doing the finest possible thing and acting in your best interests if, as you say in
your letter, you are persevering in your efforts to acquire a sound understanding. This is
something it is foolish to pray for when you can win it from your own self. There is no need to
raise our hands to heaven; there is no need to implore the temple warden to allow us close to the
ear of some graven image, as though this increased the chances of our being heard. God is near
you, is with you, is inside you. Yes, Lucilius, there resides within us a divine spirit, which guards
us and watches us in the evil and the good we do. As we treat him, so will he treat us. No man,
indeed, is good without God  is any one capable of rising above fortune unless he has help from
God? He it is that prompts us to noble and exalted endeavours. In each and every good man
A god (what god we are uncertain) dwells.*
If you have ever come on a dense wood of ancient trees that have risen to an exceptional
height, shutting out all sight of the sky with one thick screen of branches upon another, the
loftiness of the forest, the seclusion of the spot, your sense of wonderment at finding so deep and
unbroken a gloom out of doors, will persuade you of the presence of a deity. Any cave in which
the rocks have been eroded deep into the mountain resting on it, its hollowing out into a cavern
of impressive extent not produced by the labours of men but the result of processes of nature,
will strike into your soul some kind of inkling of the divine. We venerate the sources of
important streams; places where a mighty river bursts suddenly from hiding are provided with
altars; hot springs are objects of worship; the darkness or unfathomable depth of pools has made
their waters sacred. And if you come across a man who is never alarmed by dangers, never
affected by cravings, happy in adversity, calm in the midst of storm, viewing mankind from a
higher level and the gods from their own, is it not likely that a feeling will find its way into you 
of veneration for him? Is it not likely that you will say to yourself, Here is a thing which is too
great, too sublime for anyone to regard it as being in the same sort of category as that puny body
it inhabits. Into that body there has descended a divine power. The soul that is elevated and well
regulated, that passes through any experience as if it counted for comparatively little, that smiles
at all the things we fear or pray for, is impelled by a force that comes from heaven. A thing of
that souls height cannot stand without the prop of a deity. Hence the greater part of it is situated
where it descends from; in the same way as the suns rays touch the earth but are really situated
at the point from which they emanate, a soul possessed of greatness and holiness, which has been
sent down into this world in order that we may gain a nearer knowledge of the divine, associates
with us, certainly, but never loses contact with its source. On that source it depends; that is the
direction in which its eyes turn, and the direction it strives to climb in; the manner in which it
takes part in our affairs is that of a superior being.
What, then, is this soul? Something which has a lustre that is due to no quality other than
its own. Could anything be more stupid than to praise a person for something that is not his? Or
more crazy than admiring things which in a single moment can be transferred to another? It is
not a golden bit that makes one horse superior to others. Sending a lion into the arena with his
mane gilded, tired by the handling he has been given in the process of being forced to submit to
this embellishment, is a very different thing from sending in a wild one with his spirit unbroken.
Bold in attack, as nature meant him to be, in all his unkempt beauty, a beast whose glory it is that
none can look on him without fear, he stands higher in peoples eyes than the other, docile,
gold-leaf coated creature.
No one should feel pride in anything that is not his own. We praise a vine if it loads its
branches with fruit and bends its very props to the ground with the weight it carries: would any
one prefer the famous vine that had gold grapes and leaves hanging on it? Fruitfulness is the
vines peculiar virtue. So, too, in a man praise is due only to what is his very own. Suppose he
has a beautiful home and a handsome collection of servants, a lot of land under cultivation and a
lot of money out at interest; not one of these things can be said to be in him  they are just things
around him. Praise in him what can neither be given nor snatched away, what is peculiarly a
mans.
You ask what that is? It is his spirit, and the perfection of his reason in that spirit. For
man is a rational animal. Mans ideal state is realized when he has fulfilled the purpose for which
he was born. And what is it that reason demands of him? Something very easy  that he live in
accordance with his own nature. Yet this is turned into something difficult by the madness that is
universal among men; we push one another into vices. And how can people be called back to
spiritual well-being when no one is trying to hold them back and the crowd is urging them on?
LETTER XLVI
THE book you promised me has come. I was intending to read it at my convenience and I
opened it on arrival without meaning to do any more than just get an idea of its contents. The
next thing I knew the book itself had charmed me into a deeper reading of it there and then. How
lucid its style is you may gather from the fact that I found the work light reading, although a first
glance might well convey the impression that the writer was someone like Livy or Epicurus, its
bulk being rather unlike you or me! It was so enjoyable, though, that I found myself held and
drawn on until I ended up having read it right through to the end without a break. All the time the
sunshine was inviting me out, hunger prompting me to eat, the weather threatening to break, but
I gulped it all down in one sitting.
It was a joy, not just a pleasure, to read it. There was so much talent and spirit about it 
Id have said forcefulness, too, if it had been written on a quieter plane now and then and
periodically raised on to a higher one; as it was there was no such forcefulness, but instead there
was a sustained evenness of style. The writing was pure and virile  and yet not lacking in that
occasional entertaining touch, that bit of light relief at the appropriate moment. The quality of
nobility, of sublimity, you have; I want you to keep it, and to carry on just the way youre doing.
Your subject, also, contributed to the result  which is a reason why you should always
select a fertile one, one that will engage the minds attention and stimulate it. But Ill write and
say more about the book when Ive gone over it again. At the moment my judgement isnt really
a sufficiently settled one  its as if Id heard it all rather than read it. You must let me go into it
thoroughly, too. You neednt be apprehensive, youll hear nothing but the truth. How fortunate
you are in possessing nothing capable of inducing anyone to tell you a lie over a distance as great
as the one that separates us  except that even in these circumstances, when all reason for it is
removed, we still find habit a reason for telling lies!
LETTER XLVII
IM glad to hear, from these people whove been visiting you, that you live on friendly
terms with your slaves. It is just what one expects of an enlightened, cultivated person like
yourself. Theyre slaves, people say. No. Theyre human beings. Theyre slaves. But they
share the same roof as ourselves. Theyre slaves. No, theyre friends, humble friends. Theyre
slaves. Strictly speaking theyre our fellow-slaves, if you once reflect that fortune has as much
power over us as over them.
This is why I laugh at those people who think it degrading for a man to eat with his slave.
Why do they think it degrading? Only because the most arrogant of conventions has decreed that
the master of the house be surrounded at his dinner by a crowd of slaves, who have to stand
around while he eats more than he can hold, loading an already distended belly in his monstrous
greed until it proves incapable any longer of performing the function of a belly, at which point he
expends more effort in vomiting everything up than he did in forcing it down. And all this time
the poor slaves are forbidden to move their lips to speak, let alone to eat. The slightest murmur is
checked with a stick; not even accidental sounds like a cough, or a sneeze, or a hiccup are let off
a beating. All night long they go on standing about, dumb and hungry, paying grievously for any
interruption.
The result is that slaves who cannot talk before his face talk about him behind his back.
The slaves of former days, however, whose mouths were not sealed up like this, who were able
to make conversation not only in the presence of their master but actually with him, were ready
to bare their necks to the executioner for him, to divert on to themselves any danger that
threatened him; they talked at dinner but under torture they kept their mouths shut. It is just this
highhanded treatment which is responsible for the frequently heard saying, Youve as many
enemies as youve slaves. They are not our enemies when we acquire them; we make them so.
For the moment I pass over other instances of our harsh and inhuman behaviour, the way
we abuse them as if they were beasts of burden instead of human beings, the way for example,
from the time we take our places on the dinner couches, one of them mops up the spittle and
another stationed at the foot of the couch collects up the leavings of the drunken diners.
Another carves the costly game birds, slicing off choice pieces from the breast and rump with the
unerring strokes of a trained hand  unhappy man, to exist for the one and only purpose of
carving a fat bird in the proper style  although the person who learns the technique from sheer 
necessity is not quite so much to be pitied as the person who gives demonstrations of it for
pleasures sake. Another, the one who serves the wine, is got up like a girl and engaged in a
struggle with his years; he cannot get away from his boyhood, but is dragged back to it all the
time; although he already has the figure of a soldier, he is kept free of hair by having it rubbed
away or pulled out by the roots. His sleepless night is divided between his masters drunkenness
and sexual pleasures, boy at the table, man in the bedroom. Another, who has the privilege of
rating each guests character, has to go on standing where he is, poor fellow, and watch to see
whose powers of flattery and absence of restraint in appetite or speech are to secure them an
invitation for the following day. Add to these the caterers with their highly developed knowledge
of their masters palate, the men who know the flavours that will sharpen his appetite, know what
will appeal to his eyes, what novelties can tempt his stomach when it is becoming queasy, what
dishes he will push aside with the eventual coming of sheer satiety, what he will have a craving
for on that particular day.
These are the people with whom a master cannot tolerate the thought of taking his dinner,
assuming that to sit down at the same table with one of his slaves would seriously impair his
dignity. The very idea! he says. Yet have a look at the number of masters he has from the ranks
of these very slaves.* Take Callistus one-time master. I saw him once actually standing waiting
at Callistus door and refused admission while others were going inside, the very master who had
attached a price-ticket to the man and put him up for sale along with other rejects from his
household staff. Theres a slave who has paid his master back  one who was pushed into the
first lot, too, the batch on which the auctioneer is merely trying out his voice! Now it was the
slaves turn to strike his master off his list, to decide that hes not the sort of person he wants in
his house. Callistus master sold him, yes, and look how much it cost him!
How about reflecting that the person you call your slave traces his origin back to the
same stock as yourself, has the same good sky above him, breathes as you do, lives as you do,
dies as you do? It is as easy for you to see in him a free-born man as for him to see a slave in
you. Remember the Varus disaster: many a man of the most distinguished ancestry, who was
doing his military service as the first step on the road to a seat in the Senate, was brought low by
fortune, condemned by her to look after a steading, for example, or a flock of sheep. Now think
contemptuously of these peoples lot in life, in whose very place, for all your contempt, you
could suddenly find yourself.
I dont want to involve myself in an endless topic of debate by discussing the treatment of
slaves, towards whom we Romans are exceptionally arrogant, harsh and insulting. But the
essence of the advice Id like to give is this: treat your inferiors in the way in which you would
like to be treated by your own superiors. And whenever it strikes you how much power you have
over your slave, let it also strike you that your own master has just as much power over you. I
havent got a master, you say. Youre young yet; theres always the chance that youll have one.
Have you forgotten the age at which Hecuba became a slave, or Croesus, or the mother of
Darius, or Plato, or Diogenes? Be kind and courteous in your dealings with a slave; bring him
into your discussions and conversations and your company generally. And if at this point all
those people who have been spoilt by luxury raise an outcry protesting, as they will, There
couldnt be anything more degrading, anything more disgraceful, let me just say that these are
the very persons I will catch on occasion kissing the hand of someone elses slave.
Dont you notice, too, how our ancestors took away all odium from the masters position
and all that seemed insulting or degrading in the lot of the slave by calling the master father of
the household and speaking of the slaves as members of the household (something which 
survives to this day in the mime)? They instituted, too, a holiday on which master and slave were
to eat together, not as the only day this could happen, of course, but as one on which it was
always to happen. And in the household they allowed the slaves to hold official positions and to
exercise some jurisdiction in it; in fact they regarded the household as a miniature republic.
Do you mean to say, comes the retort, that Im to have each and every one of my
slaves sitting at the table with me? Not at all, any more than youre to invite to it everybody who
isnt a slave. Youre quite mistaken, though, if you imagine that Id bar from the table certain
slaves on the grounds of the relatively menial or dirty nature of their work  that muleteer, for
example, or that cowhand. I propose to value them according to their character, not their jobs.
Each man has a character of his own choosing; it is chance or fate that decides his choice of job.
Have some of them dine with you because they deserve it, others in order to make them so
deserving. For if theres anything typical of the slave about them as a result of the low company
theyre used to living in, it will be rubbed off through association with men of better breeding.
You neednt, my dear Lucilius, look for friends only in the City or the Senate; if you keep
your eyes open, youll find them in your own home. Good material often lies idle for want of
someone to make use of it; just give it a trial. A man who examines the saddle and bridle and not
the animal itself when he is out to buy a horse is a fool; similarly, only an absolute fool values a
man according to his clothes, or according to his social position, which after all is only
something that we wear like clothing.
Hes a slave. But he may have the spirit of a free man. Hes a slave. But is that really
to count against him? Show me a man who isnt a slave; one is a slave to sex, another to money,
another to ambition; all are slaves to hope or fear. I could show you a man who has been a
Consul who is a slave to his little old woman, a millionaire who is the slave of a little girl in
domestic service. I could show you some highly aristocratic young men who are utter slaves to
stage artistes. And theres no state of slavery more disgraceful than one which is self-imposed.
So you neednt allow yourself to be deterred by the snobbish people Ive been talking about from
showing good humour towards your slaves instead of adopting an attitude of arrogant superiority
towards them. Have them respect you rather than fear you.
Here, just because Ive said they should respect a master rather than fear him, someone
will tell us that Im now inviting slaves to proclaim their freedom and bringing about their
employers overthrow. Are slaves to pay their respects like dependent followers or early
morning callers? Thats what he means, I suppose. Anyone saying this forgets that what is
enough for a god, in the shape of worship, cannot be too little for a master. To be really respected
is to be loved; and love and fear will not mix. Thats why I think youre absolutely right in not
wishing to be feared by your slaves, and in confining your lashings to verbal ones; as instruments
of correction, beatings are for animals only. Besides, what annoys us does not necessarily do us
any harm; but we masters are apt to be robbed of our senses by mere passing fancies, to the point
where our anger is called out by anything which fails to answer to our will. We assume the
mental attitudes of tyrants. For they too forget their own strength and the helplessness of others
and grow white-hot with fury as if they had received an injury, when all the time they are quite
immune from any such danger through the sheer exaltedness of their position. Nor indeed are
they unaware of this; but it does not stop them seizing an opportunity of finding fault with an
inferior and maltreating him for it; they receive an injury by way of excuse to do one themselves.
But I wont keep you any longer; you dont need exhortation. It is a mark of a good way
of life that, among other things, it satisfies and abides; bad behaviour, constantly changing, not
for the better, simply into different forms, has none of this stability.
LETTER XLVIII
I SHALL reply later to the letter you sent me while you were on your journey  it was as
long as the journey itself! I must first take myself aside and deliberate what advice I should give.
For you yourself, before consulting me as you are doing, gave long thought to the question
whether you should consult me at all, so I ought to be giving this question of advice far longer
thought, on the principle that it takes you more time to solve a problem than to set it. Particularly
when one course is to your interest and another to mine  or does this make me sound like an
Epicurean again? No, if a thing is in your interest it is also in my own interest. Otherwise, if any
matter that affects you is no concern of mine, I am not a friend. Friendship creates a community
of interest between us in everything. We have neither successes nor setbacks as individuals; our
lives have a common end. No one can lead a happy life if he thinks only of himself and turns
everything to his own purposes. You should live for the other person if you wish to live for
yourself. The assiduous and scrupulous cultivation of this bond, which leads to our associating
with our fellow-men and believes in the existence of a common law for all mankind, contributes
more than anything else to the maintenance of that more intimate bond I was mentioning,
friendship. A person who shares much with a fellow human being will share everything with a
friend.
What I should like those subtle thinkers  you know the ones I mean, my peerless
Lucilius  to teach me is this, what my duties are to a friend and to a man, rather than the number
of senses in which the expression friend is used and how many different meanings the word
man has. Before my very eyes wisdom and folly are taking their separate stands: which shall I
join, whose side am I to follow? For one person man is equivalent to friend, for another man
and friend are far from being identified, and in making a friend one man will be seeking an
asset while another will be making himself an asset to the other; and in the midst of all this what
you people do for me is pull words about and cut up syllables. One is led to believe that unless
one has constructed syllogisms of the craftiest kind, and reduced fallacies to a compact form in
which a false conclusion is derived from a true premise, one will not be in a position to
distinguish what one should aim at and what one should avoid. It makes one ashamed  that men
of our advanced years should turn a thing as serious as this into a game.
Mouse is a syllable, and a mouse nibbles cheese; therefore, a syllable nibbles cheese.
Suppose for the moment I cant detect the fallacy in that. What danger am I placed in by such
lack of insight? What serious consequences are there in it for me? What I have to fear, no doubt,
is the possibility, one of these days, of my catching a syllable in a mousetrap or even having my
cheese eaten up by a book if Im not careful. Unless perhaps the following train of logic is a
more acute one: Mouse is a syllable, and a syllable does not nibble cheese; therefore, a mouse
does not nibble cheese. What childish fatuities these are! Is this what we philosophers acquire
wrinkles in our brows for? Is this what we let our beards grow long for? Is this what we teach
with faces grave and pale?
Shall I tell you what philosophy holds out to humanity? Counsel. One person is facing
death, another is vexed by poverty, while another is tormented by wealth  whether his own or
someone elses; one man is appalled by his misfortunes while another longs to get away from his
own prosperity; one man is suffering at the hands of men, another at the hands of the gods.
Whats the point of concocting whimsies for me of the sort Ive just been mentioning? This isnt
the place for fun  youre called in to help the unhappy. Youre pledged to bring succour to the
shipwrecked, to those in captivity, to the sick, the needy and men who are just placing their 
heads beneath the executioners uplifted axe. Where are you off to? What are you about? The
person youre engaging in word-play with is in fear  go to his aid.* All mankind are
stretching out their hands to you on every side. Lives that have been ruined, lives that are on the
way to ruin are appealing for some help; it is to you that they look for hope and assistance. They
are begging you to extricate them from this awful vortex, to show them in their doubt and
disarray the shining torch of truth. Tell them what nature has made necessary and what she has
made superfluous. Tell them how simple are the laws she has laid down, and how
straightforward and enjoyable life is for those who follow them and how confused and
disagreeable it is for others who put more trust in popular ideas than they do in nature. All right
if you can point out to me where those puzzles are likely to bring such people relief. Which of
them removes cravings or brings them under control? If only they were simply unhelpful!
Theyre actually harmful. Ill give you the clearest proof whenever you like of their tendency to
weaken and enfeeble even eminent talents once applied to such quibbles. And when it comes to
saying how they equip people proposing to do battle with fortune and what weapons they offer
them, one hangs ones head with shame. Is this the way to our supreme ideal? Do we get there by
means of all that if X, Y, or if not Y, Z one finds in philosophy? And by means of quibbles that
would be shameful and discreditable even among persons occupying themselves with law
reports? When youre leading the person youre questioning into a trap, arent you just making it
look as if he has lost his case on a purely technical point of pleading? The praetors court,
however, restores litigants losing in this way to their rightful position, and philosophy does the
same for the people thus questioned. Why do philosophers like you abandon the magnificent
promises you have made? After assuring me in solemn terms that you will see to it that my eyes
shall no more be overwhelmed by the glitter of gold than by the glitter of a sword, that I shall
spurn with magnificent strength of purpose the things all other men pray for and the things all
other men are afraid of, why do you have to descend to the schoolroom A B C? What do you
say?
Is this the way to the heavens?*
For that is what philosophy has promised me  that she will make me Gods equal. Thats
the invitation and thats what Ive come for; be as good as your word.
Keep clear, then, my dear Lucilius, as far as you can, of the sort of quibbles and
qualifications Ive been mentioning in philosophers. Straightforwardness and simplicity are in
keeping with goodness. Even if you had a large part of your life remaining before you, you
would have to organize it very economically to have enough for all the things that are necessary;
as things are, isnt it the height of folly to learn inessential things when times so desperately
short!
LETTER LIII
I WONDER whether theres anything I couldnt be persuaded into now, after letting
myself be persuaded recently into taking a trip by sea. The sea was quite calm when we cast off.
The sky was certainly heavily overcast, with the kind of dark clouds that generally break in a
squall or downpour. But in spite of the uncertain, threatening skies, I thought it would be
perfectly feasible to make it across the few miles from your Parthenope over to Puteoli. And so,
with the object of getting the crossing over quicker, I headed straight for Nesis over the open
water to cut out all the intervening curves of the coast-line. Now when I had got so far across that
it made no odds whether I went on or turned back, first of all the smoothness which had tempted
me to my undoing disappeared. There was no storm as yet, but a heavy swell was running by 
then and the waves were steadily getting rougher. I began asking the helmsman to put me ashore
somewhere. He kept saying the coast was a rugged one without a haven anywhere and that there
was nothing he feared quite so much in a storm as a lee shore. I was in far too bad a way, though,
for any thought of possible danger to enter my head, as I was suffering the torments of that
sluggish brand of seasickness that will not bring one relief, the kind that upsets the stomach
without clearing it. So I put pressure on him and compelled him, willy-nilly, to make for the
shore. Once we were close in there was no waiting on my part for anything to be done in the
manner commended by Virgil,
Bows faced seawards
or
Anchor cast from bow.*
Remembering my training as a long-standing devotee of cold baths, I dived into the sea in
just the way a cold-water addict ought to  in my woolly clothes. You can imagine what I
suffered as I crawled out over the rocks, as I searched for a route to safety or fought my way
there. It made me realize how right sailors are in being afraid of a lee shore. What I endured, in
my inability to endure my then self, is beyond belief. You can take it from me that the reason
Ulysses got himself wrecked everywhere was not so much because Neptune was against him
from the day he was born, but because he was given to seasickness like me  itll take me twenty
years to reach my destination, too, if I ever have to journey anywhere by sea!
As soon as Id settled my stomach (for stomachs, as you know, arent clear of seasickness
the moment theyre clear of the sea) and rubbed myself over with embrocation to put some life
back into my body, I began to reflect how we are attended by an appalling forgetfulness of our
weaknesses, even the physical ones which are continually bringing themselves to our notice, and
much more so with those that are not only more serious but correspondingly less apparent. A
slight feverishness may deceive a person, but when it has developed to the point where a genuine
fever is raging it will extract an admission that something is wrong from even a tough and
hardened individual. Suppose our feet ache, with little needling pains in the joints: at this stage
we pass it off and say weve sprained an ankle or strained something in some exercise or other;
while the disorder is in its indeterminate, commencing phase, its name eludes us, but once it
starts bending the feet in just the way an ankle-rack does and makes them both misshapen, we
have to confess that weve got the gout.
With afflictions of the spirit, though, the opposite is the case: the worse a person is, the
less he feels it. You neednt feel surprised, my dearest Lucilius; a person sleeping lightly
perceives impressions in his dreams and is sometimes, even, aware during sleep that he is asleep,
whereas a heavy slumber blots out even dreams and plunges the mind too deep for consciousness
of self. Why does no one admit his failings? Because hes still deep in them. Its the person
whos awakened who recounts his dream, and acknowledging ones failings is a sign of health.
So let us rouse ourselves, so that we may be able to demonstrate our errors. But only philosophy
will wake us; only philosophy will shake us out of that heavy sleep. Devote yourself entirely to
her. Youre worthy of her, shes worthy of you  fall into each others arms. Say a firm, plain no
to every other occupation. Theres no excuse for your pursuing philosophy merely in moments
when occasion allows. If you were sick you would take a rest from attending to your personal
affairs and drop your practice in the courts. And during a spell of improvement in your condition
you wouldnt look on any client as being so important that youd undertake his case in court. No,
youd devote your entire attention to recovering from your illness in the quickest possible time.
Well, then, arent you going to do the same in these circumstances? Away with every obstacle 
and leave yourself free to acquire a sound mind  no one ever attains this if hes busy with other
things. Philosophy wields an authority of her own; she doesnt just accept time, she grants one it.
Shes not something one takes up in odd moments. Shes an active, full-time mistress, ever
present and demanding. When some state or other offered Alexander a part of its territory and
half of all its property he told them that he hadnt come to Asia with the intention of accepting
whatever they cared to give him, but of letting them keep whatever he chose to leave them.
Philosophy, likewise, tells all other occupations: Its not my intention to accept whatever time is
left over from you; you shall have, instead, what I reject.
Give your whole mind to her. Sit at her side and pay her constant court, and an enormous
gap will widen between yourself and other men. Youll end up far in advance of all mankind,
and not far behind the gods themselves. Would you like to know what the actual difference
between yourself and the gods will be? They will exist for longer. And yet to me what an
indisputable mark it is of a great artist to have captured everything in a tiny compass; a wise man
has as much scope before him as a god with all eternity in front of him. There is one thing, too,
in which the wise man actually surpasses any god: a god has nature to thank for his immunity
from fear, while the wise man can thank his own efforts for this. Look at that for an achievement,
to have all the frailty of a human being and all the freedom from care of a god. Philosophys
power to blunt all the blows of circumstance is beyond belief. Never a missile lodges in her; she
has strong, impenetrable defences; some blows she breaks the force of, parrying them with the
slack of her gown as if they were trivial, others she flings off and hurls back at the sender.
LETTER LIV
ILL health  which had granted me quite a long spell of leave  has attacked me without
warning again. What kind of ill health? youll be asking. And well you may, for there isnt a
single kind I havent experienced. Theres one particular ailment, though, for which Ive always
been singled out, so to speak. I see no reason why I should call it by its Greek name,* difficulty
in breathing being a perfectly good way of describing it. Its onslaught is of very brief duration 
like a squall, it is generally over within the hour. One could hardly, after all, expect anyone to
keep on drawing his last breath for long, could one? Ive been visited by all the troublesome or
dangerous complaints there are, and none of them, in my opinion, is more unpleasant than this
one  which is hardly surprising, is it, when you consider that with anything else youre merely
ill, while with this youre constantly at your last gasp? This is why doctors have nicknamed it
rehearsing death, since sooner or later the breath does just what it has been trying to do all
those times. Do you imagine that as I write this I must be feeling in high spirits at having escaped
this time? No, it would be just as absurd for me to feel overjoyed at its being over  as if this
meant I was a healthy man again  as it would be for a person to think he has won his case on
obtaining an extension of time before trial.
Even as I fought for breath, though, I never ceased to find comfort in cheerful and
courageous reflections. Whats this? I said. So death is having all these tries at me, is he? Let
him, then! I had a try at him a long while ago myself. When was this? youll say. Before I was
born. Death is just not being. What that is like I know already. It will be the same after me as it
was before me. If there is any torment in the later state, there must also have been torment in the
period before we saw the light of day; yet we never felt conscious of any distress then. I ask you,
wouldnt you say that anyone who took the view that a lamp was worse off when it was put out
than it was before it was lit was an utter idiot? We, too, are lit and put out. We suffer somewhat
in the intervening period, but at either end of it there is a deep tranquillity. For, unless Im 
mistaken, we are wrong, my dear Lucilius, in holding that death follows after, when in fact it
precedes as well as succeeds. Death is all that was before us. What does it matter, after all,
whether you cease to be or never begin, when the result of either is that you do not exist?
I kept on talking to myself in these and similar terms  silently, needless to say, words
being out of the question. Then little by little the affliction in my breathing, which was coming to
be little more than a panting now, came on at longer intervals and slackened away. It has lasted
on, all the same, and in spite of the passing of this attack, my breathing is not yet coming
naturally. I feel a sort of catch and hesitation in it. Let it do as it pleases, though, so long as the
sighs arent heartfelt. You can feel assured on my score of this: I shall not be afraid when the last
hour comes  Im already prepared, not planning as much as a day ahead. The man, though,
whom you should admire and imitate is the one who finds it a joy to live and in spite of that is
not reluctant to die. For wheres the virtue in going out when youre really being thrown out?
And yet there is this virtue about my case: Im in the process of being thrown out, certainly, but
the manner of it is as if I were going out. And the reason why it never happens to a wise man is
that being thrown out signifies expulsion from a place one is reluctant to depart from, and there
is nothing the wise man does reluctantly. He escapes necessity because he wills what necessity is
going to force on him.
LETTER LV
IVE just this moment returned from a ride in my sedanchair, feeling as tired as if Id
walked the whole distance instead of being seated all the way. Even to be carried for any length
of time is hard work, and all the more so, I dare say, because it is unnatural, nature having given
us legs with which to do our own walking, just as she gave us eyes with which to do our own
seeing. Soft living imposes on us the penalty of debility; we cease to be able to do the things
weve long been grudging about doing. However, I was needing to give my body a shaking up,
either to dislodge some phlegm, perhaps, that had collected in my throat, or to have some
thickness, due to one cause or another, in my actual breathing reduced by the motion, which Ive
noticed before has done me some good. So I deliberately continued the ride for quite a long way,
with the beach itself tempting me onwards. It sweeps round between Cumae and Servilius
Vatias country house in a sort of narrow causeway with the sea on one side and a lagoon on the
other. A recent storm had left it firm; for, as you know, a fast-running heavy surf makes a beach
flat and smooth, while a longish period of calm weather leads to a disintegration of this surface
with the disappearance of the moisture that binds the particles of sand together.
I had started looking around me in my usual way to see whether I could find anything I
could turn to good account, when my eyes turned to the house which had once belonged to Vatia.
This was the place where Vatia passed the latter part of his life, a wealthy man who had held the
office of praetor but was famed for nothing but his life of retirement, and considered a fortunate
man on that ground alone. For whenever a man was ruined through being a friend of Asinius
Gallus or an enemy of Sejanus, or devoted to Sejanus (for it came to be as dangerous to have
been a follower of his as it was to cross him), people used to exclaim, Vatia, youre the only
person who knows how to live! What in fact he knew was how to hide rather than how to live.
And there is a lot of difference between your life being a retiring one and its being a spineless
one. I never used to pass this house while Vatia was alive without saying, Here lieth Vatia. But
philosophy, my dear Lucilius, is such a holy thing and inspires so much respect, that even
something that resembles it has a specious appeal. Let a man retire and the common crowd will
think of him as leading a life apart, free of all cares, self-contented, living for himself, when in 
fact not one of these blessings can be won by anyone other than the philosopher. He alone knows
how to live for himself: he is the one, in fact, who knows the fundamental thing, how to live. The
person who has run away from the world and his fellow-men, whose exile is due to the
unsuccessful outcome of his own desires, who is unable to endure the sight of others more
fortunate, who has taken to some place of hiding in his alarm like a timid, inert animal, he is not
living for himself, but for his belly and his sleep and his passions  in utter degradation, in
other words. The fact that a person is living for nobody does not automatically mean that he is
living for himself. Still, a persevering steadfastness of purpose counts for a lot, so that even
inertia if stubbornly maintained may carry a certain weight.
I cant give you any accurate information about the house itself. I only know the front of
it and the parts in view, the parts that it displays even to passers-by. There are two artificial
grottoes, considerable feats of engineering, each as big as the most spacious hall, one of them not
letting in the sun at all, the other retaining it right up until its setting. There is a grove of plane
trees through the middle of which runs a stream flowing alternately, like a tide-race, into the sea
and into the Acherusian Lake, a stream capable of supporting a stock of fish even if constantly
exploited; it is left alone, though, when the sea is open: only when bad weather gives the
fishermen a holiday do they lay hands on this ready supply. But the most advantageous feature of
the house is that it has Baiae next door; it enjoys all the amenities of that resort and is free from
its disadvantages. I can speak for these attractions from personal knowledge, and I am quite
prepared to believe, too, that it is an all-the-year-round house, since it lies in the path of the
western breeze, catching it to such an extent as to exclude Baiae from the benefit of it. Vatia
seems to have been no fool in choosing this place as the one in which he would spend his
retirement, sluggish and senile as that retirement had become.
The place ones in, though, doesnt make any contribution to peace of mind: its the spirit
that makes everything agreeable to oneself. Ive seen for myself people sunk in gloom in
cheerful and delightful country houses, and people in completely secluded surroundings who
looked as if they were run off their feet. So theres no reason why you should feel that youre not
as much at rest in your mind as you might be just because youre not here in Campania. Why
arent you, for that matter? Transmit your thoughts all the way here. Theres nothing to stop you
enjoying the company of absent friends, as often as you like, too, and for as long as you like.
This pleasure in their company  and theres no greater pleasure  is one we enjoy the more
when were absent from one another. For having our friends present makes us spoilt; as a result
of our talking and walking and sitting together every now and then, on being separated we
havent a thought for those weve just been seeing. One good reason, too, why we should endure
the absence patiently is the fact that every one of us is absent to a great extent from his friends
even when they are around. Count up in this connexion first the nights spent away from one
another, then the different engagements that keep each one busy, then the time passed in the
privacy of ones study and in trips into the country, and youll see that periods abroad dont
deprive us of so very much. Possession of a friend should be with the spirit: the spirits never
absent: it sees daily whoever it likes. So share with me my studies, my meals, my walks. Life
would be restricted indeed if there were any barrier to our imaginations. I see you, my dear
Lucilius, I hear you at this very moment. I feel so very much with you that I wonder whether I
shouldnt start writing you notes rather than letters!
LETTER LVI
I CANNOT for the life of me see that quiet is as necessary to a person who has shut 
himself away to do some studying as it is usually thought to be. Here am I with a babel of noise
going on all about me. I have lodgings right over a public bathhouse. Now imagine to yourself
every kind of sound that can make one weary of ones years. When the strenuous types are doing
their exercises, swinging weight-laden hands about, I hear the grunting as they toil away  or go
through the motions of toiling away  at them, and the hissings and strident gasps every time
they expel their pent up breath. When my attention turns to a less active fellow who is contenting
himself with an ordinary inexpensive massage, I hear the smack of a hand pummelling his
shoulders, the sound varying according as it comes down flat or cupped. But if on top of this
some ball player comes along and starts shouting out the score, thats the end! Then add
someone starting up a brawl, and someone else caught thieving, and the man who likes the sound
of his voice in the bath, and the people who leap into the pool with a tremendous splash. Apart
from those whose voices are, if nothing else, natural, think of the hair remover, continually
giving vent to his shrill and penetrating cry in order to advertise his presence, never silent unless
it be while he is plucking someones armpits and making the client yell for him! Then think of
the various cries of the man selling drinks, and the one selling sausages and the other selling
pastries, and all the ones hawking for the catering shops, each publicizing his wares with a
distinctive cry of his own.
You must be made of iron, you may say, or else hard of hearing if your mind is
unaffected by all this babel of discordant noises around you, when continual good morning
greetings were enough to finish off the Stoic Chrysippus! But I swear I no more notice all this
roar of noise than I do the sound of waves or falling water  even if I am here told the story of a
people on the Nile who moved their capital solely because they could not stand the thundering of
a cataract! Voices, I think, are more inclined to distract one than general noise; noise merely fills
ones ears, battering away at them while voices actually catch ones attention. Among the things
which create a racket all around me without distracting me at all I include the carriages hurrying
by in the street, the carpenter who works in the same block, a man in the neighbourhood who
saws, and this fellow tuning horns and flutes at the Trickling Fountain and emitting blasts instead
of music. I still find an intermittent noise more irritating than a continuous one. But by now I
have so steeled myself against all these things that I can even put up with a coxswains strident
tones as he gives his oarsmen the rhythm. For I force my mind to become self-absorbed and not
let outside things distract it. There can be absolute bedlam without so long as there is no
commotion within, so long as fear and desire are not at loggerheads, so long as meanness and
extravagance are not at odds and harassing each other. For what is the good of having silence
throughout the neighbourhood if ones emotions are in turmoil?
The peaceful stillness of the night had lulled
The world to rest.*
This is incorrect. There is no such thing as peaceful stillness except where reason has
lulled it to rest. Night does not remove our worries; it brings them to the surface. All it gives us is
a change of anxieties. For even when people are asleep they have dreams as troubled as their
days. The only true serenity is the one which represents the free development of a sound mind.
Look at the man whose quest for sleep demands absolute quiet from his spacious house. To
prevent any sound disturbing his ears every one of his host of slaves preserves total silence and
those who come anywhere near him walk on tip-toe. Naturally enough he tosses from side to
side, trying to snatch some fitful sleep in between the spells of fretting, and complains of having
heard sounds when he never heard them at all. And what do you suppose is the reason? His mind
is in a ferment. It is this which needs to be set at peace. Here is the mutiny that needs to be 
suppressed. The fact that the body is lying down is no reason for supposing that the mind is at
peace. Rest is sometimes far from restful. Hence our need to be stimulated into general activity
and kept occupied and busy with pursuits of the right nature whenever we are victims of the sort
of idleness that wearies of itself. When great military commanders notice indiscipline among
their men they suppress it by giving them some work to do, mounting expeditions to keep them
actively employed. People who are really busy never have enough time to become skittish. And
there is nothing so certain as the fact that the harmful consequences of inactivity are dissipated
by activity.
We commonly give the impression that the reasons for our having gone into political
retirement are our disgust with public life and our dissatisfaction with some uncongenial and
unrewarding post. Yet every now and then ambition rears its head again in the retreat into which
we were really driven by our apprehensions and our waning interest; for our ambition did not
cease because it had been rooted out, but merely because it had tired  or become piqued,
perhaps, at its lack of success. I would say the same about extravagant living, which appears on
occasion to have left one and then, when one has declared for the simple life, places temptation
in the way. In the middle of ones programme of frugality it sets out after pleasures which one
had discarded but not condemned, its pursuit of them indeed being all the more ardent the less
one is aware of it. For when they are in the open vices invariably take a more moderate form;
diseases too are on the way towards being cured when once they have broken out, instead of
being latent, and made their presence felt. So it is with the love of money, the love of power and
the other maladies that affect the minds of men  you may be sure that it is when they abate and
give every appearance of being cured that they are at their most dangerous. We give the
impression of being in retirement, and are nothing of the kind. For if we are genuine in this, if we
have sounded the retreat and really turned away from the surface show, then, as I was saying a
little while ago, nothing will distract us. Men and birds together in full chorus will never break
into our thinking when that thinking is good and has at last come to be of a sure and steady
character.
The temperament that starts at the sound of a voice or chance noises in general is an
unstable one and one that has yet to attain inward detachment. It has an element of uneasiness in
it, and an element of the rooted fear that makes a man a prey to anxiety, as in the description
given by our Virgil:
And I, who formerly would never flinch
At flying spears or serried ranks of Greeks,
Am now alarmed by every breeze and roused
By every sound to nervousness, in fear
For this companion and this load alike.*
The earlier character here is the wise man, who knows no fear at the hurtling of missiles,
or the clash of weapons against weapons in the close-packed ranks, or the thunderous noise of a
city in destruction. The other, later one has everything to learn; fearing for his belongings he
pales at every noise; a single cry, whatever it is, prostrates him, being immediately taken for the
yelling of the enemy; the slightest movement frightens him out of his life; his baggage makes
him a coward. Pick out any one of your successful men, with all they trail or carry about with
them, and you will have a picture of the man in fear for this companion and this load. You may
be sure, then, that you are at last lulled to rest when noise never reaches you and when voices
never shake you out of yourself, whether they be menacing or inviting or just a meaningless
hubbub of empty sound all round you.
This is all very well, you may say, but isnt it sometimes a lot simpler just to keep
away from the din? I concede that, and in fact it is the reason why I shall shortly be moving
elsewhere. What I wanted was to give myself a test and some practice. Why should I need to
suffer the torture any longer than I want to when Ulysses found so easy a remedy for his
companions even against the Sirens?*
LETTER LXIII
I AM very sorry to hear of your friend Flaccus death. Still, I would not have you grieve
unduly over it. I can scarcely venture to demand that you should not grieve at all  and yet I am
convinced that it is better that way. But who will ever be granted that strength of character,
unless he be a man already lifted far out of fortunes reach? Even he will feel a twinge of pain
when a thing like this happens  but only a twinge. As for us, we can be pardoned for having
given way to tears so long as they have not run down in excessive quantities and we have
checked them for ourselves. When one has lost a friend ones eyes should be neither dry nor
streaming. Tears, yes, there should be, but not lamentation. Can you find the rule I am laying
down a harsh one when the greatest of Greek poets has restricted to a single day, no more, a
persons right to cry  in the passage where he tells us that even Niobe remembered to eat?*
Would you like to know what lies behind extravagant weeping and wailing? In our tears we are
trying to find means of proving that we feel the loss. We are not being governed by our grief but
parading it. No one ever goes into mourning for the benefit merely of himself. Oh, the miserable
folly of it all  that there should be an element of ostentation in grief!
Come now, you will be asking, are you saying that I should forget a person who has
been a friend? Well, you are not proposing to keep him very long in your memory if his
memory is to last just as long as your grief. At any moment something or other will happen that
will turn that long face of yours into a smiling one. I do not see very much time going by before
the sense of loss is mitigated and even the keenest sorrowings settle down. Your face will cease
to be its present picture of sadness as soon as you take your eyes off yourself. At the moment you
are keeping a watch on your grief  but even as you do it is fading away, and the keener it is the
quicker it is in stopping.
Let us see to it that the recollection of those we have lost becomes a pleasure to us.
Nobody really cares to cast his mind back to something which he is never going to think of
without pain. Inevitable as it is that the names of persons who were dear to us and are now lost
should cause us a gnawing sort of pain when we think of them, that pain is not without a pleasure
of its own. As my teacher Attalus used to say, In the pleasure we find in the memory of departed
friends there is a resemblance to the way in which certain bitter fruits are agreeable or the very
acidity of an exceedingly old wine has its attraction. But after a certain interval all that pained us
is obliterated and the enjoyment comes to us unalloyed. If we are to believe him, Thinking of
friends who are alive and well is like feasting on cakes and honey. Recalling those who are gone
is pleasant but not without a touch of sourness. Who would deny, though, that even acid things
like this with a harshness in their taste do stimulate the palate? Personally I do not agree with
him there. Thinking of departed friends is to me something sweet and mellow. For when I had
them with me it was with the feeling that I was going to lose them, and now that I have lost them
I keep the feeling that I have them with me still.
So, my dear Lucilius, behave in keeping with your usual fair-mindedness and stop
misinterpreting the kindness of fortune. She has given as well as taken away. Let us therefore go
all out to make the most of friends, since no one can tell how long we shall have the opportunity. 
Let us just think how often we leave them behind when we are setting out on some long journey
or other, or how often we fail to see them when we are staying in the same area, and we shall
realize that we have lost all too much time while they are still alive. Can you stand people who
treat their friends with complete neglect and then mourn them to distraction, never caring about
anyone unless they have lost him? And the reason they lament them so extravagantly then is that
they are afraid people may wonder whether they did care; they are looking for belated means of
demonstrating their devotion. If we have other friends, we are hardly kind or appreciative of
them if they count for so very little when it comes to consoling us for the one we have buried. If
we have no other friends, we have done ourselves a greater injury than fortune has done us: she
has deprived us of a single friend but we have deprived ourselves of every friend we have failed
to make. A person, moreover, who has not been able to care about more than one friend cannot
have cared even about that one too much. Supposing someone lost his one and only shirt in a
robbery, would you not think him an utter idiot if he chose to bewail his loss rather than look
about him for some means of keeping out the cold and find something to put over his shoulders?
You have buried someone you loved. Now look for someone to love. It is better to make good
the loss of a friend than to cry over him.
What I am about to go on to say is, I know, a commonplace, but I am not going to omit it
merely because every one has said it. Even a person who has not deliberately put an end to his
grief finds an end to it in the passing of time. And merely growing weary of sorrowing is quite
shameful as a means of curing sorrow in the case of an enlightened man. I should prefer to see
you abandoning grief than it abandoning you. Much as you may wish to, you will not be able to
keep it up for very long, so give it up as early as possible. For women our forefathers fixed the
period of mourning at a year with the intention, not that women should continue mourning as
long as that, but that they should not go on any longer: for men no period is prescribed at all
because none would be decent. Yet out of all the pathetic females you know of who were only
dragged away from the graveside, or even torn from the body itself, with the greatest of
difficulty, can you show me one whose tears lasted for a whole month? Nothing makes itself
unpopular quite so quickly as a persons grief. When it is fresh it attracts people to its side, finds
someone to offer it consolation; but if it is perpetuated it becomes an object of ridicule 
deservedly, too, for it is either feigned or foolish.
And all this comes to you from me, the very man who wept for Annaeus Serenus, that
dearest of friends to me, so unrestrainedly that I must needs be included  though this is the last
thing I should want  among examples of men who have been defeated by grief! Nevertheless I
condemn today the way I behaved then. I realize now that my sorrowing in the way I did was
mainly due to the fact that I had never considered the possibility of his dying before me. That he
was younger than I was, a good deal younger top, was all that ever occurred to me  as if fate
paid any regard to seniority! So let us bear it constantly in mind that those we are fond of are just
as liable to death as we are ourselves. What I should have said before was, My friend Serenus is
younger than I am, but what difference does that make? He should die later than me, but it is
quite possible he will die before me. It was just because I did not do so that fortune caught me
unprepared with that sudden blow. Now I bear it in mind not only that all things are liable to
death but that that liability is governed by no set rules. Whatever can happen at any time can
happen today. Let us reflect then, my dearest Lucilius, that we ourselves shall not be long in
reaching the place we mourn his having reached. Perhaps, too, if only there is truth in the story
told by sages and some welcoming abode awaits us, he whom we suppose to be dead and gone
has merely been sent on ahead.
LETTER LXV
I SHARED yesterday with a bout of illness. It claimed the morning but it let me have the
afternoon. So I started off by doing some reading to see what energy I had. Then, as it proved up
to this, I ventured to make further demands on it  or perhaps I should say concessions to it  and
did some writing. I was at this with more than my customary concentration, too, what with the
difficulty of the subject and my refusal to give in, until some friends of mine put a stop to it,
applying force to restrain me as if I were an invalid who was recklessly overdoing things. The
pen gave place to talk, which included the following matter of dispute that I shall now state to
you. We have appointed you as arbitrator  and you have more of a case on your hands than you
think, for the contest is a three-cornered one.
Our Stoic philosophers, as you know, maintain that there are two elements in the universe
from which all things are derived, namely cause and matter. Matter lies inert and inactive, a
substance with unlimited potential, but destined to remain idle if no one sets it in motion; and it
is cause (this meaning the same as reason) which turns matter to whatever end it wishes and
fashions it into a variety of different products. There must, then, be something out of which
things come into being and something else by means of which things come into being; the first is
matter and the second is cause. Now all art is an imitation of nature. So apply what I was saying
about the universe to mans handiwork. Take a statue: it had the matter to be worked on by the
sculptor and it had the sculptor to give configuration to the matter  bronze, in other words, in
the case of the statue, being the matter and the craftsman the cause. It is the same with all things:
they consist of something which comes into being and something else which brings them into
being.
Stoics believe that there is only one cause  that which brings things into being. Aristotle
thinks that the term cause can be used in three different ways. The first cause, he says, is
matter  without it nothing can be brought into existence. The second is the craftsman, and the
third is form, which is impressed on every single piece of work as on a statue. This last is what
Aristotle calls the idos. And, he says, there is a fourth as well, the purpose of the whole work.
Let me explain what this means. The first cause of the statue is the bronze, as it would never
have been made unless there had been something out of which it could be cast or moulded. The
second cause is the sculptor, as the bronze could not have been shaped into the state in which it
is without those skilled hands having come to it. The third cause is the form, as our statue could
not have been called The Man with the Spear or The Boy tying up his Hair* had this not been
the guise impressed on it. The fourth cause is the end in view in its making, for had this not
existed the statue would never have been made at all. What is this end? It is what attracted the
sculptor, what his goal was in creating it: it may have been money, if when he worked it he was
going to sell it, or fame, if the aim of his endeavours was to win a name, or religion, if it was a
work for presentation to a temple. This too, then, is a cause of the statues coming into being 
unless you take the view that things in the absence of which the statue would never have been
created should not be included among the causes of the particular creation.
To these four causes Plato adds a fifth in the model  what he himself calls the idea  this
being what the sculptor had constantly before his eyes as he executed the intended work.
It does not matter whether he has his model without, one to which he can direct his eyes,
or within, conceived and set up by the artist inside his own head. God has within himself models
like this of everything in the universe, his mind embracing the designs and calculations for his
projects; he is full of these images which Plato calls ideas, eternal, immutable, ever dynamic. So 
though human beings may perish, humanity in itself  the pattern on which every human being is
moulded  lasts on, and while human beings go through much and pass away itself remains quite
unaffected. As Plato has it, then, there are five causes: the material, the agent, the form, the
model and the end; and finally we get the result of all these. In the case of the statue, to use the
example we began with, the material is the bronze, the agent is the sculptor, the form is the guise
it is given, the model is what the sculptor making it copies, the end is what the maker has in
view, and the final result is the statue itself. The universe as well, according to Plato, has all
these elements. The maker is God; matter is the material; the form is the general character and
lay-out of the universe as we see it; the model naturally enough is the pattern which God adopted
for the creation of this stupendous work in all its beauty; the end is what God had in view when
he created it, and that  in case you are asking what is the end God has in view  is goodness.
That at any rate is what Plato says: What was the cause of Gods creating the universe? He is
good, and whoever is good can never be grudging with anything good; so he made it as good a
world as it was in his power to make it.
Now it is for you as judge to pronounce your verdict and declare whose statement in your
opinion seems to be  not the truest (for that here is as far out of our reach as Truth herself)  but
most like the truth.
This assortment of causes which Aristotle and Plato have collected together embraces
either too much or too little. For if they take the view that everything in the absence of which a
thing cannot be brought into being is a cause of its creation, they have failed to name enough.
They should be including time in their list of causes  nothing can come into being without time.
They should be including place  a thing will certainly not come into being if there is nowhere
for this to happen. They should be including motion  without this nothing either comes into
existence or goes out of existence; without motion there is no such thing as art and no such thing
as change. What we are looking for at the moment is a primary and general cause. And this must
be something elementary, since matter too is elementary. If we ask what cause is, surely the
answer is creative reason, that is to say God. All those things which you have listed are not an
array of individual causes, but dependent on a single one, the cause that actually creates. You
may say form is a cause, but form is something which the artist imposes on his work  a part of
the cause, yes, but not a cause. The model, too, is an indispensable instrument of the cause, but
not a cause. To the sculptor his model is as indispensable as his chisel or his file: his art can get
nowhere without them, but this does not make them parts or causes of the art. The end the artist
has in view, our friend says, the thing which induces him to set about a work of creation, is a
cause. Even if we grant that it is, it is only an accessory cause, not the effective cause.
Accessory causes are infinite in number; what we are after is the general cause. In any event that
assertion on the part of Plato and Aristotle that the universe in its entirety, the whole, completed
work of creation, is a cause is not in keeping with their usual acuteness as thinkers. There is a
very great difference between a creation and its cause.
Now you must either pronounce your verdict or  the easier course in matters of this
nature  declare your inability to arrive at one and order a rehearing. What pleasure, you may
say, do you get out of frittering time away discussing those questions? Its not as if you could
say they rid you of any emotion or drive out any desire. Well, in raising and arguing these less
deserving topics my own attitude is that they serve to calm the spirit, and that whilst I examine
myself first, certainly, I examine the universe around me afterwards. I am not even wasting time,
as you suppose, at the moment. For those questions, provided they are not subjected to a mincing
or dissection with the useless kind of over-subtlety we have just seen as the result, all elevate and 
lighten the spirit, the soul which yearns to win free of the heavy load it is saddled with here and
return to the world where it once belonged. For to it this body of ours is a burden and a torment.
And harassed by the bodys overwhelming weight, the soul is in captivity unless philosophy
comes to its rescue, bidding it breathe more freely in the contemplation of nature, releasing it
from earthly into heavenly surroundings. This to the soul means freedom, the ability to wander
far and free; it steals away for a while from the prison in which it is confined and has its strength
renewed in the world above. When craftsmen engaged on some intricate piece of work which
imposes a tiring strain on the eyes have to work by an inadequate and undependable light, they
go out into the open air and treat their eyes to the free sunshine in some open space or other
dedicated to public recreation. In the same way the soul, shut away in this dim and dismal
dwelling, as often as it can makes for the open and finds its relaxation in contemplating the
natural universe. The wise man and devotee of philosophy is needless to say inseparable from his
body, and yet he is detached from it so far as the best part of his personality is concerned,
directing his thoughts towards things far above. He looks on this present life of his, much like the
man who has signed on as a soldier, as the term he has to serve out. And he is so made that he
neither loves life nor hates it. He endures the lot of mortality even though he knows there is a
finer one in store for him.
Are you telling me not to investigate the natural world? Are you trying to bar me from
the whole of it and restrict me to a part of it? Am I not to inquire how everything in the universe
began, who gave things form, who separated them out when they were all plunged together in a
single great conglomeration of inert matter? Am I not to inquire into the identity of the artist who
created that universe? Or the process by which this huge mass became subject to law and order?
Or the nature of the one who collected the things that were scattered apart, sorted apart the things
that were commingled, and when all things lay in formless chaos allotted them their individual
shapes? Or the source of the light (is it fire or is it something brighter?) that is shed on us in such
abundance? Am I supposed not to inquire into this sort of thing? Am I not to know where I am
descended from, whether I am to see this world only once or be born into it again time after time,
what my destination is to be after my stay here, what abode will await my soul on its release
from the terms of its serfdom on earth? Are you forbidding me to associate with heaven, in other
words ordering me to go through life with my eyes bent on the ground? I am too great, was born
to too great a destiny to be my bodys slave. So far as I am concerned that body is nothing more
or less than a fetter on my freedom. I place it squarely in the path of fortune, letting her expend
her onslaught on it, not allowing any blow to get through it to my actual self. For that body is all
that is vulnerable about me: within this dwelling so liable to injury there lives a spirit that is free.
Never shall that flesh compel me to feel fear, never shall it drive me to any pretence unworthy of
a good man; never shall I tell a lie out of consideration for this petty body. I shall dissolve our
partnership when this seems the proper course, and even now while we are bound one to the
other the partnership will not be on equal terms: the soul will assume undivided authority.
Refusal to be influenced by ones body assures ones freedom.
And to this freedom (to get back to the subject) even the kind of inquiries we were
talking about just now have a considerable contribution to make. We know that everything in the
universe is composed of matter and of God. God, encompassed within them, controls them all,
they following his leadership and guidance. Greater power and greater value reside in that which
creates (in this case God) than in the matter on which God works. Well, the place which in this
universe is occupied by God is in man the place of the spirit. What matter is in the universe the
body is in us. Let the worse, then, serve the better. Let us meet with bravery whatever may befall 
us. Let us never feel a shudder at the thought of being wounded or of being made a prisoner, or
of poverty or persecution. What is death? Either a transition or an end. I am not afraid of coming
to an end, this being the same as never having begun, nor of transition, for I shall never be in
confinement quite so cramped anywhere else as I am here.
LETTER LXXVII
TODAY we saw some boats from Alexandria  the ones they call the mail packets 
come into view all of a sudden. They were the ones which are normally sent ahead to announce
the coming of the fleet that will arrive behind them. The sight of them is always a welcome one
to the Campanians. The whole of Puteoli crowded onto the wharves, all picking out the
Alexandrian vessels from an immense crowd of other shipping by the actual trim of their sails,
these boats being the only vessels allowed to keep their topsails spread. Out at sea all ships carry
these sails, for nothing makes quite the same contribution to speed as the upper canvas, the area
from which a boat derives the greatest part of its propulsion. That is why whenever the wind
stiffens and becomes unduly strong sail is shortened, the wind having less force lower down. On
entering the channel between Capri and the headland from which
Upon the storm-swept summit Pallas keeps
Her high lookout,*
regulations require all other vessels to confine themselves to carrying a mainsail, and the
topsail is accordingly conspicuous on the Alexandrian boats.
While everyone around me was hurrying thus from all directions to the waterfront, I
found a great deal of pleasure in refusing to bestir myself. Although there would be letters for me
from my people over there I was in no hurry to know what reports they might be carrying or
what might be the state of my financial interests there. For a long time now I have not been
concerned about any profit or loss. This particular pleasure was one that I ought to have been
experiencing even if I were not an old man; but being old in fact made it all the greater, for it
meant that however little money I might have I should still have more left to cover the journey
than distance left to be covered  especially as the journey on which we have all set out is one
which does not have to be travelled to the very end. An ordinary journey will be incomplete if
you come to a stop in the middle of it, or anywhere short of your destination, but life is never
incomplete if it is an honourable one. At whatever point you leave life, if you leave it in the right
way, it is a whole. And there are many occasions on which a man should leave life not only
bravely but for reasons which are not as pressing as they might be  the reasons which restrain us
being not so pressing either.
Tullius Marcellinus, whom you knew very well, a man, old before his years, who found
tranquillity early in life, began to meditate suicide after he had gone down with a disease which
was not an incurable one but at the same time was a protracted, troublesome one, importunate in
its demands. He called together a large number of his friends, and each one offered him advice.
This consisted either of urgings (from the timid among them) that he should just take whichever
course he himself felt urged to take, or of whatever counsel flattering admirers thought would be
most likely to gratify someone meditating suicide, until a Stoic friend of mine, an outstanding
personality for whom I can find no more fitting compliment than that of calling him a man of
fighting courage, gave what I thought was the most inspiring advice. This was how he began:
My dear Marcellinus, he said, you mustnt let this worry you as if you were having to make a
great decision. Theres nothing so very great about living  all your slaves and all the animals do
it. What is, however, a great thing is to die in a manner which is honourable, enlightened and 
courageous. Think how long now youve been doing the same as them  food, sleep, sex, the
never-ending cycle. The desire for death can be experienced not merely by the enlightened or the
brave or the unhappy, but even by the squeamish. Well, Marcellinus wanted no urging, only a
helper. His slaves refused to obey him in this, whereupon our Stoic talked away their fears,
letting them know that the household staff could only be in danger if there had been any room for
doubt as to whether their masters death had been a voluntary one; besides, he told them, it was
just as bad to let other people see you ordering your master not to kill himself as actually to kill
him. He then suggested to Marcellinus himself that it would not be an unkind gesture if, in the
same way as at the end of a dinner the leftovers are divided among the attendants, something
were offered at the end of his life to those who had served throughout it. Marcellinus had a
generous and good-natured disposition which was no less evident where it meant personal
expense, and he distributed accordingly little sums of money among his slaves, who were now in
tears, and went out of his way to comfort them all. He did not need to resort to a weapon or to
shedding blood. After going without food for three days he had a steam tent put up, in his own
bedroom; a bath was brought in, in which he lay for a long time, and as fresh supplies of hot
water were continually poured in he passed almost imperceptibly away, not without, as he
commented more than once, a kind of pleasurable sensation, one that is apt to be produced by the
gentle fading out of which those of us who have ever fainted will have some experience.
I have digressed, but you will not have minded hearing this story, since you will gather
from it that your friends departure was not a difficult or unhappy one. Although his death was
self-inflicted, the manner of his passing was supremely relaxed, a mere gliding out of life. Yet
the story is not without its practical value for the future. For frequently enough necessity
demands just such examples. The times are frequent enough when we cannot reconcile ourselves
to dying, or to knowing that we ought to die.
No one is so ignorant as not to know that some day he must die. Nevertheless when death
draws near he turns, wailing and trembling, looking for a way out. Wouldnt you think a man a
prize fool if he burst into tears because he didnt live a thousand years ago? A man is as much a
fool for shedding tears because he isnt going to be alive a thousand years from now. Theres no
difference between the one and the other  you didnt exist and you wont exist  youve no
concern with either period. This is the moment youve been pitched into  supposing you were to
make it longer how long would you make it? Whats the point of tears? Whats the point of
prayers? Youre only wasting your breath.
So give up hoping that your prayers can bring
Some change in the decisions of the gods.*
Those decisions are fixed and permanent, part of the mighty and eternal train of destiny.
You will go the way that all things go. What is strange about that? This is the law to which you
were born; it was the lot of your father, your mother, your ancestors and of all who came before
you as it will be of all who come after you. There is no means of altering the irresistible
succession of events which carries all things along in its binding grip. Think of the multitudes of
people doomed to die that will be following you, that will be keeping you company! I imagine
youd be braver about it if thousands upon thousands were dying with you: the fact is that men as
well as other creatures are breathing their last in one way or another in just such numbers at the
very instant when youre unable to make your mind up about death. You werent thinking,
surely, that you wouldnt yourself one day arrive at the destination towards which youve been
heading from the beginning? Every journey has its end.
Here I imagine youll be expecting me to tell you the stories of examples set by heroic 
men? Well, Ill tell you about ones which children have set. History relates the story of the
famous Spartan, a mere boy who, when he was taken prisoner, kept shouting in his native Doric,
I shall not be a slave! He was as good as his word. The first time he was ordered to perform a
slaves task, some humiliating household job (his actual orders were to fetch a disgusting
chamber pot), he dashed his head against a wall and cracked his skull open. Freedom is as near
as that  is anyone really still a slave?54 Would you not rather your own son died like that than
lived by reason of spinelessness to an advanced age? Why be perturbed, then, about death when
even a child can meet it bravely? Suppose you refuse to follow him: you will just be dragged
after him. Assume the authority which at present lies with others. Surely you can adopt the
spirited attitude of that boy and say, No slave am I! At present, you unhappy creature, slave
you are, slave to your fellow-men, slave to circumstance and slave to life (for life itself is slavery
if the courage to die be absent).
Have you anything that might induce you to wait? You have exhausted the very pleasures
that make you hesitate and hold you back; not one of them has any novelty for you, not one of
them now fails to bore you out of sheer excess. You know what wine or honey-wine tastes like:
it makes no difference whether a hundred or a thousand flagons go through your bladder  all
you are is a strainer. You are perfectly familiar with the taste of oysters or mullet. Your luxurious
way of life has kept back not a single fresh experience for you to try in coming years. And yet
these are the things from which you are reluctant to be torn away. What else is there which you
would be sorry to be deprived of? Friends? Do you know how to be a friend? Your country? Do
you really value her so highly that you would put off your dinner for her? The sunlight? If you
could you would put out that light  for what have you ever done that deserved a place in it?
Confess it  it is no attachment to the world of politics or business, or even the world of nature,
that makes you put off dying  the delicatessens, in which there is nothing you have left untried,
are what you are reluctant to leave. You are scared of death  but how magnificently heedless of
it you are while you are dealing with a dish of choice mushrooms! You want to live  but do you
know how to live? You are scared of dying  and, tell me, is the kind of life you lead really any
different from being dead? Caligula was once passing a column of captives on the Latin Road
when one of them, with a hoary old beard reaching down his breast, begged to be put to death.
So, replied Caligula, you are alive, then, as you are? That is the answer to give to people to
whom death would actually come as a release. You are scared of dying? So you are alive, then,
as you are?
Someone, though, will say, But I want to live because of all the worthy activities Im
engaged in. Im performing lifes duties conscientiously and energetically and Im reluctant to
leave them undone. Come now, surely you know that dying is also one of lifes duties? Youre
leaving no duty undone, for theres no fixed number of duties laid down which youre supposed
to complete. Every life without exception is a short one. Looked at in relation to the universe
even the lives of Nestor and Sattia were short. In Sattia, who ordered that her epitaph should
record that she had lived to the age of ninety-nine, you have an example of someone actually
boasting of a prolonged old age  had it so happened that she had lasted out the hundredth year
everybody, surely, would have found her quite insufferable! As it is with a play, so it is with life
 what matters is not how long the acting lasts, but how good it is. It is not important at what
point you stop. Stop wherever you will  only make sure that you round it off with a good
ending.
LETTER LXXVIII
I AM all the more sorry to hear of the trouble you are having with constant catarrh, and
the spells of feverishness which go with it when it becomes protracted to the point of being
chronic, because this kind of ill health is something I have experienced myself. In its early stages
I refused to let it bother me, being still young enough then to adopt a defiant attitude to sickness
and put up with hardships, but eventually I succumbed to it altogether. Reduced to a state of
complete emaciation, I had arrived at a point where the catarrhal discharges were virtually
carrying me away with them altogether. On many an occasion I felt an urge to cut my life short
there and then, and was only held back by the thought of my father, who had been the kindest of
fathers to me and was then in his old age. Having in mind not how bravely I was capable of
dying but how far from bravely he was capable of bearing the loss, I commanded myself to live.
There are times when even to live is an act of bravery.
Let me tell you the things that provided me with consolation in those days, telling you to
begin with that the thoughts which brought me this peace of mind had all the effect of medical
treatment. Comforting thoughts (provided they are not of a discreditable kind) contribute to a
persons cure; anything which raises his spirits benefits him physically as well. It was my Stoic
studies that really saved me. For the fact that I was able to leave my bed and was restored to
health I give the credit to philosophy. I owe her  and it is the least of my obligations to her  my
life. But my friends also made a considerable contribution to my return to health. I found a great
deal of relief in their cheering remarks, in the hours they spent at my bedside and in their
conversations with me. There is nothing, my good Lucilius, quite like the devotion of ones
friends for supporting one in illness and restoring one to health, or for dispelling ones
anticipation and dread of death. I even came to feel that I could not really die when these were
the people I would leave surviving me, or perhaps I should say I came to think I would continue
to live because of them, if not among them; for it seemed to me that in death I would not be
passing away but passing on my spirit to them. These things gave me the willingness to help my
own recovery and to endure all the pain. It is quite pathetic, after all, if one has put the will to die
behind one, to be without the will to live.
There, then, are your remedies. The doctor will be telling you how much walking you
should do, how much exercise you should take; he will be telling you not to overdo the inactivity
 as is the tendency with invalids  and recommending reading aloud to exercise the breathing
(its passages and reservoir being the areas affected); he will recommend that you take a trip by
sea and derive some stimulation for the internal organs from the gentle motion of the boat; he
will prescribe a diet for you, and tell you when to make use of wine as a restorative and when to
give it up in case it starts you coughing or aggravates your cough. My own advice to you  and
not only in the present illness but in your whole life as well  is this: refuse to let the thought of
death bother you: nothing is grim when we have escaped that fear. There are three upsetting
things about any illness: the fear of dying, the physical suffering and the interruption of our
pleasures. I have said enough about the first, but will just say this, that the fear is due to the facts
of nature, not of illness. Illness has actually given many people a new lease of life; the
experience of being near to death has been their preservation. You will die not because you are
sick but because you are alive. That end still awaits you when you have been cured. In getting
well again you may be escaping some ill health but not death. Now let us go back and deal with
the disadvantage which really does belong to illness, the fact that it involves considerable
physical torments. These are made bearable by their intermittency. For when pain is at its most
severe the very intensity finds means of ending it. Nobody can be in acute pain and feel it for
long. Nature in her unlimited kindness to us has so arranged things as to make pain either 
bearable or brief. The severest pains have their seat in the most attenuated parts of the body; any
area of slight dimensions like a tendon or a joint causes excruciating agony when trouble arises
within its small confines. But these parts of our anatomy go numb very quickly, the pain itself
giving rise to a loss of all sensation of pain (either because the life force is impaired by being
held up in its natural circulation and so loses its active power, the power which enables it to give
us warning of pain, or because the diseased secretions, no longer able to drain away, become
self-obliterated and deprive the areas they have congested of sensation). Thus gout in the feet or
the hands or any pain in the vertebrae or tendons has intermittent lulls when it has dulled the area
it is torturing; these are all cases in which the distress is caused by the initial twinges and the
violence of the pain disappears as time goes on, the suffering ending in a state of insensibility.
The reason why pain in an eye, an ear or a tooth is exceptionally severe is the fact that it
develops in a limited area, and indeed this applies just as much to pains in the head; nevertheless
if its intensity goes beyond a certain point it is turned into a state of dazed stupefaction. So there
is the comforting thing about extremities of pain: if you feel it too much you are bound to stop
feeling it.
What in fact makes people who are morally unenlightened upset by the experience of
physical distress is their failure to acquire the habit of contentment with the spirit. They have
instead been preoccupied by the body. That is why a man of noble and enlightened character
separates body from spirit and has just as much to do with the former, the frail and complaining
part of our nature, as is necessary and no more, and a lot to do with the better, the divine element.
But its hard having to do without pleasures were used to, having to give up food and go thirsty
as well as hungry. Tiresome it is in the first stages of abstinence. Later, as the organs of appetite
decline in strength with exhaustion, the cravings die down; thereafter the stomach becomes
fussy, unable to stand things it could never have enough of before. The desires themselves die
away. And there is nothing harsh about having to do without things for which you have ceased to
have any craving.
Another point is that every pain leaves off altogether, or at least falls off in intensity,
from time to time. Moreover one can guard against its arrival and employ drugs to forestall it just
as it is coming on; for every pain (or at least every pain with a habit of regular recurrence) gives
one advance warning of its coming. In illness the suffering is always bearable so long as you
refuse to be affected by the ultimate threat.
So do not go out of your way to make your troubles any more tiresome than they are and
burden yourself with fretting. Provided that ones thinking has not been adding anything to it,
pain is a trivial sort of thing. If by contrast you start giving yourself encouragement, saying to
yourself, Its nothing  or nothing much, anyway  lets stick it out, itll be over presently, then
in thinking it a trivial matter you will be ensuring that it actually is. Everything hangs on ones
thinking. The love of power or money or luxurious living are not the only things which are
guided by popular thinking. We take our cue from peoples thinking even in the way we feel
pain.
A man is as unhappy as he has convinced himself he is. And complaining away about
ones sufferings after they are over (you know the kind of language: No one had ever been in
such a bad state. The torments and hardships I endured! No one thought I would recover. The
number of times I was given up for lost by the family! The number of times I was despaired of
by the doctors! A man on the rack isnt torn with pain the way I was) is something I think
should be banned. Even if all this is true, it is past history. Whats the good of dragging up
sufferings which are over, of being unhappy now just because you were then? What is more, 
doesnt everyone add a good deal to his tale of hardships and deceive himself as well in the
matter? Besides, there is a pleasure in having succeeded in enduring, something the actual
enduring of which was very far from pleasant; when some trouble or other comes to an end the
natural thing is to be glad. There are two things, then, the recollecting of trouble in the past as
well as the fear of troubles to come, that I have to root out: the first is no longer of any concern
to me and the second has yet to be so. And when a man is in the grip of difficulties he should say
There may be pleasure in the memory
Of even these events one day.*
He should put his whole heart into the fight against them. If he gives way before them he
will lose the battle; if he exerts himself against them he will win. What in fact most people do is
pull down on their own heads what they should be holding up against; when something is in
imminent danger of falling on you, the pressure of it bearing heavily on you, it will only move
after you and become an even greater weight to support if you back away from it; if instead you
stand your ground, willing yourself to resist, it will be forced back. Look at the amount of
punishment that boxers and wrestlers take to the face and the body generally! They will put up
none the less with any suffering in their desire for fame, and will undergo it all not merely in the
course of fighting but in preparing for their fights as well: their training in itself constitutes
suffering. Let us too overcome all things, with our reward consisting not in any wreath or
garland, not in trumpet-calls for silence for the ceremonial proclamation of our name, but in
moral worth, in strength of spirit, in a peace that is won for ever once in any contest fortune has
been utterly defeated.
Im suffering severe pain, you may say. Well does it stop you suffering it if you endure
it in a womanish fashion? In the same way as the enemy can do far more damage to your army if
it is in full retreat, every trouble that may come our way presses harder on the one who has
turned tail and is giving ground. But its really severe. Well, is courage only meant to enable us
to bear up under what is not severe? Would you rather have an illness thats long drawn out or
one thats short and quick? If its a long one it will have the odd interval, giving one opportunity
for rallying, granting one a good deal of time free of it, having of necessity to pause in order to
build up again. An illness thats swift and short will have one of two results: either oneself or it
will be snuffed out. And what difference does it make whether I or it disappears? Either way
theres an end to the pain.
Another thing which will help is to turn your mind to other thoughts and that way get
away from your suffering. Call to mind things which you have done that have been upright or
courageous; run over in your mind the finest parts that you have played. And cast your memory
over the things you have most admired; this is a time for recollecting all those individuals of
exceptional courage who have triumphed over pain: the man who steadily went on reading a
book while he was having varicose veins cut out: the man who never stopped smiling under
torture albeit that this angered his tormentors into trying on him every instrument of cruelty they
had. If pain has been conquered by a smile will it not be conquered by reason? And here you
may mention anything you care to name, catarrh, a fit of uninterrupted coughing so violent that it
brings up parts of the internal organs, having ones very entrails seared by a fever, thirst, having
limbs wrenched in different directions with dislocation of the joints, or  worse than these 
being stretched on the rack or burnt alive, or subjected to the red-hot plates and instruments
designed to re-open and deepen swelling wounds. There have been men who have undergone
these experiences and never uttered a groan. He needs more, he hasnt asked for mercy he
needs more, he still hasnt answered he needs more, he has actually smiled, and not a forced 
smile either. Surely pain is something you will want to smile at after this.
But my illness has taken me away from my duties and wont allow me to achieve
anything. It is your body, not your mind as well, that is in the grip of ill health. Hence it may
slow the feet of a runner and make the hands of a smith or cobbler less efficient, but if your mind
is by habit of an active turn you may still give instruction and advice, listen and learn, inquire
and remember. Besides, if you meet sickness in a sensible manner, do you really think you are
achieving nothing? You will be demonstrating that even if one cannot always beat it one can
always bear an illness. There is room for heroism, I assure you, in bed as anywhere else. War and
the battle-front are not the only spheres in which proof is to be had of a spirited and fearless
character: a persons bravery is no less evident under the bed-clothes. There is something it lies
open to you to achieve, and that is making the fight with illness a good one. If its threats or
importunities leave you quite unmoved, you are setting others a signal example. How much
scope there would be for renown if whenever we were sick we had an audience of spectators! Be
your own spectator anyway, your own applauding audience.
Pleasures, moreover, are of two kinds. The physical pleasures are the ones which illness
interferes with, though it does not do away with them altogether  indeed, if you take a true view
of the matter, they are actually sharpened by illness, a man deriving greater pleasure from
drinking something when he is thirsty and finding food all the more welcome through being
hungry, anything set before one after one has had to fast being greeted with a heightened
appetite. But no doctor can refuse his patient those other, greater and surer pleasures, the
pleasures of the mind and spirit. Anyone who follows these and genuinely knows them pays no
attention whatever to all the enticements of the senses. How very unfortunate he is, people say,
to be sick like that! Why? Because he isnt melting snow in his wine? Because he isnt
breaking ice into a bumper goblet to keep the drink he has mixed in it chilled? Because Lucrine
oysters arent being opened before him at his table? Because there isnt any bustling of cooks
about the dining-room, bringing in not just the viands themselves but the actual cooking
apparatus along with them? For this is the latest innovation in luxurious living, having the
kitchen accompany the dinner in to the table so as to prevent any of the food losing its heat and
avoid anything being at a temperature insufficiently scalding for palates which are nowadays like
leather. How very unfortunate he is to be sick, they say. In fact hell be eating just as much as
hell digest. There wont be a whole boar lying somewhere where people can see it, conveying
the impression that it has been banished from the table as being too cheap and ordinary a piece of
meat to be on it, nor will he have his trolley piled high with  now that people think it not quite
nice to see the whole bird  carved breast of fowl. And whats so bad about your being deprived
of that? You may be eating like a sick man, but youll at last be eating in the way a healthy man
should.
But given one thing we shall find it easy to put up with the potions and warm drinks and
all the rest of it  all the things that seem unbearable to people who have become spoilt, who
have become soft through a life of luxury, ailing more in the mind than they ever are in the body;
the one requirement is that we cease to dread death. And so we shall as soon as we have learnt to
distinguish the good things and the bad things in this world. Then and then only shall we stop
being weary of living as well as scared of dying. For a life spent viewing all the variety, the
majesty, the sublimity in things around us can never succumb to ennui: the feeling that one is
tired of being, of existing, is usually the result of an idle and inactive leisure. Truth will never
pall on someone who explores the world of nature, wearied as a person will be by the spurious
things. Moreover, even if death is on the way with a summons for him, though it come all too 
early, though it cut him off in the prime of life, he has experienced every reward that the very
longest life can offer, having gained extensive knowledge of the world we live in, having learnt
that time adds nothing to the finer things in life. Whereas any life must needs seem short to
people who measure it in terms of pleasures which through their empty nature are incapable of
completeness.
Let these reflections promote your recovery, and meanwhile do find time for our
correspondence. Time will bring us together again one of these days; and when, as it will, the
reunion comes, however short it may last, knowing how to make the most of it will turn it into a
long one. As Posidonius said, In a single day there lies open to men of learning more than there
ever does to the unenlightened in the longest of lifetimes. In the meantime cling tooth and nail
to the following rule: not to give in to adversity, never to trust prosperity, and always take full
note of fortunes habit of behaving just as she pleases, treating her as if she were actually going
to do everything it is in her power to do. Whatever you have been expecting for some time
comes as less of a shock.
LETTER LXXXIII
YOU demand an account of my days  generally as well as individually. You think well
of me if you suppose that there is nothing in them for me to hide. And we should, indeed, live as
if we were in public view, and think, too, as if someone could peer into the inmost recesses of
our hearts  which someone can! For what is to be gained if something is concealed from man
when nothing is barred from God? He is present in our minds, in attendance in the midst of our
thoughts  although by attendance I do not mean to suggest that he is not at times absent from
our thoughts. I shall do as you say, then, and gladly give you a record of what I do and in what
order. I shall put myself under observation straight away and undertake a review of my day  a
course which is of the utmost benefit. What really ruins our characters is the fact that none of us
looks back over his life. We think about what we are going to do, and only rarely of that, and fail
to think about what we have done, yet any plans for the future are dependent on the past.
Today has been unbroken. No one has robbed me of any part of it. It has been wholly
divided between my bed and my reading. A very small part of it has been given over to physical
exercise  and on this account Im grateful for old age, for the exercise costs me little trouble. I
only have to stir and Im weary, and that after all is the end of exercise even for the strongest.
Interested in having my trainers? Ones enough for me  Pharius, a likeable young fellow, as you
know, but hes due for a change. Im looking now for someone rather more youthful. He in fact
declares that were both at the same climacteric since were both losing our teeth. But Ive
reached the stage where I can only keep up with him with difficulty when were out for a run,
and before many days are out I wont be able to keep up with him at all. See what daily exercise
does for one. When two people are going in opposite directions theres soon a big distance
between them: hes coming up at the same time as Im going downwards, and you know how
much quicker travel is in the second of these directions. But Im wrong: the age Im at isnt one
that is going downwards  its one thats in headlong descent.
However, youd like to hear how todays race ended? Well, we made it a tie, something
that doesnt often happen with runners. After this, more a spell of exhaustion than of exercise, I
had a cold plunge  cold, with me, meaning just short of warm! Here I am, once celebrated as a
devotee of cold baths, regularly paying my respects to the Canal on the first of January and
jumping into the Maiden Pool in just the same way as I read, wrote and spoke some sentence or
other every New Year in order to ensure good luck in the coming year; and now Ive shifted my 
scene of operations, first to the Tiber, then to my own pool here, which, even when Im feeling
my heartiest and dont cheat, has had the chill taken off it by the sun; its a short step to a hot
bath! The next thing is breakfast, which consists of some dry bread; no table laid, and no need to
wash the hands after such a meal. I then have the briefest of naps. You know this habit of mine,
of dropping off for a moment or two, just slipping off the harness, as you might say. I find it
enough to have simply stopped being awake. Sometimes I know Ive been asleep, sometimes
merely guess I have been.*
Zeno was a very great man as well as the founder of our Stoic school, a school with an
unequalled record for courageous and saintly living; well, listen to the way in which, desiring to
deter us from drunkenness, he deduces the principle that the good man wont get drunk. No
person who is drunk, he says, is entrusted with a secret: the good man is entrusted with a secret:
therefore, the good man will not get drunk. Watch how ridiculous hes made to look when we
counter with a single syllogism on the same pattern (of the many we could advance its sufficient
to instance one). No person who is asleep is entrusted with a secret: the good man is entrusted
with a secret: therefore, the good man does not go to sleep.
Now just let each of us name for himself the people he knows can be trusted with a secret
though they cant be trusted with a bottle. Ill give, all the same, one solitary example myself,
just to prevent its being lost to human memory! Life needs a stock of noteworthy examples; nor
need we always go running to antiquity for them. Lucius Piso was drunk from the very moment
of his appointment as Warden of the City of Rome. He regularly spent most of the night wining
and dining in company, and slept from then until around midday, noon to him being early
morning; he nevertheless discharged his duties, which embraced the general welfare of the whole
city, with the utmost efficiency. The late emperor Augustus as well as Tiberius entrusted him
with secret orders, the former on appointing him governor of Thrace (the conquest of which he
completed), the latter when he left Rome for Campania, leaving behind him in the capital many
objects of distrust and hostility. I imagine it was because Pisos drunken habits had been such a
success so far as he was concerned that Tiberius later appointed Cossus to be Prefect of the City.
This man, otherwise dignified and self-controlled, steeped himself in liquor, soaking it up to such
an extent that on one occasion in the Senate, having come there straight from a party, he
succumbed to a slumber from which nothing could rouse him and had to be carried out. Yet this
did not stop Tiberius writing (in his own hand) a number of letters to Cossus the contents of
which he did not consider suitable for communication even to his ministers; and Cossus never let
slip a single secret, whether private or official.
If you want to arrive at the conclusion that the good man ought not to get drunk, why set
about it with syllogisms? Tell people how disgusting it is for a man to pump more into himself
than he can hold and not to know the capacity of his own stomach. Tell them of all the things
men do that they would blush at sober, and that drunkenness is nothing but a state of self-induced
insanity. For imagine the drunken mans behaviour extended over several days: would you
hesitate to think him out of his mind? As it is, the difference is simply one of duration, not of
degree. Point to the example of Alexander of Macedon, stabbing his dearest and truest friend,
Clitus, at a banquet, and wanting to die, as indeed he should have done, when he realized the
enormity of what he had done. Drunkenness inflames and lays bare every vice, removing the
reserve that acts as a check on impulses to wrong behaviour. For people abstain from forbidden
things far more often through feelings of inhibition when it comes to doing what is wrong than
through any will to good. Add to this the drunkards ignorance of his situation, his indistinct,
uncertain speech, his inability to walk straight, his unsteady eye and swimming head, with his 
very home in a state of motion  as if the whole house had been set spinning by some cyclone 
and the tortures in his stomach as the wine ferments.
Where is the glory in mere capacity? When the victory rests with you, when all the
company lie prostrate around you, slumbering or vomiting, declining all your calls for another
toast, when you find yourself the only person at the party still on your feet, when your mighty
prowess has enabled you to beat all comers and no one has proved able to match your intake, a
barrel is none the less enough to beat you.
What else was it but drinking to excess, together with a passion for Cleopatra itself as
potent as drink, that ruined that great and gifted man, Mark Antony, dragging him down into
foreign ways of living and un-Roman vices? This it was that made him an enemy of the state;
this is what made him no match for his enemies; it was this that made him cruel, having the
heads of his countrys leading men brought in to him at the dinner-table, identifying the hands
and features of liquidated opponents in the course of banquets marked by sumptuous
magnificence and regal pomp, still thirsting for blood when filled to the full with wine.
Explain, then, why the good man should avoid getting drunk, using facts, not words, to
show its ugliness and offensiveness. Prove  and an easy task it is  that so-called pleasures,
when they go beyond a certain limit, are but punishments.
LETTER LXXXVI
HERE I am, staying at the country house which once belonged to Scipio of Africa
himself. I am writing after paying my respects to his departed spirit as well as to an altar which I
rather think may be the actual tomb of that great soldier. His soul will have gone to heaven,
returned in fact to the place from which it came. What convinces me of this is not the size of the
armies he commanded  for Cambyses equally had such armies and Cambyses was merely a
madman who turned his madness to good account  but his quite exceptional self-restraint and
sense of duty. This is something in him which I find even more deserving of admiration at the
time when he finally left his country than during the time when he was fighting for her. Was
Scipio to stay in Rome? Or was Rome to stay a free democracy? That was then the choice. What
did Scipio say? I have no wish he said, to have the effect of weakening in the least degree our
laws or institutions. All Roman citizens must be equal before the law. I ask my country, then, to
make the most of what I have done for her, but without me. If she owes it to me that she is today
a free country, let me also prove that she is free. If my stature has grown too great for her best
interests, then out I go. Am I not justified in admiring that nobility of character which led him to
retire, to go into voluntary exile to relieve the state of an embarrassing burden? Events had come
to the point where either Scipio or democracy was going to suffer at the others hands. Neither of
these two things could justly be permitted to happen. So he gave way to her constitution and,
proposing that the nation should be no less indebted to him for his absence from the scene than
for Hannibals, he went off into retirement at Liternum.
I have seen the house, which is built of squared stone blocks; the wall surrounding the
park; and the towers built out on both sides of the house for purposes of defence; the well,
concealed among the greenery and out-buildings, with sufficient water to provide for the needs
of a whole army; and the tiny little bath, situated after the old-fashioned custom in an ill-lit
corner, our ancestors believing that the only place where one could properly have a hot bath was
in the dark. It was this which started in my mind reflections that occasioned me a good deal of
enjoyment as I compared Scipios way of life and our own. In this corner the famous Terror of
Carthage, to whom Rome owes it that she has only once* in her history been captured, used to 
wash a body weary from work on the farm! For he kept himself fit through toil, cultivating his
fields by his own labour, as was the regular way in the old days. And this was the ceiling, dingy
in the extreme, under which he stood; and this the equally undistinguished paving that carried his
weight.
Who is there who could bear to have a bath in such surroundings nowadays? We think
ourselves poorly off, living like paupers, if the walls are not ablaze with large and costly circular
mirrors, if our Alexandrian marbles are not decorated with panels of Numidian marble, if the
whole of their surface has not been given a decorative overlay of elaborate patterns having all the
variety of fresco murals, unless the ceiling cannot be seen for glass, unless the pools into which
we lower bodies with all the strength drained out of them by lengthy periods in the sweating
room are edged with Thasian marble (which was once the rarest of sights even in a temple),
unless the water pours from silver taps. And so far we have only been talking about the ordinary
fellows plumbing. What about the bath-houses of certain former slaves? Look at their arrays of
statues, their assemblies of columns that do not support a thing but are put up purely for
ornament, just for the sake of spending money. Look at the cascades of water splashing noisily
down from one level to the next. We have actually come to such a pitch of choosiness that we
object to walking on anything other than precious stones.
In this bathroom of Scipios there are tiny chinks  you could hardly call them windows 
pierced in the masonry of the wall in such a way as to let in light without in any way weakening
its defensive character. Nowadays moth-hole is the way some people speak of a bathroom
unless it has been designed to catch the sun through enormous windows all day long, unless a
person can acquire a tan at the same time as he is having a bath, unless he has views from the
bath over countryside and sea.
The result is that bath-houses which drew admiring crowds when they were first opened
are actually dismissed as antiquated as soon as extravagance has hit on any novelty calculated to
put its own best previous efforts in the shade. There was a time when bath-houses were few and
far between, and never in the least luxuriously appointed  and why should they have been,
considering that they were designed for use, not for diversion, and that admission only cost you a
copper? There were no showers in those days, and the water did not come in a continuous gush
as if from a hot spring. People did not think it mattered then how clear the water was in which
they were going to get rid of the dirt. Heavens, what a pleasure it is to go into one of those
half-lit bath-houses with their ordinary plastered ceilings, where you knew that Cato himself as
aedile  or Fabius Maximus, or one of the Cornelii  regulated the warmth of your water with his
own hand! For, however high their rank, it was one of the duties of the aediles to enter all such
premises as were open to the public and enforce standards of cleanliness and a healthy sort of
temperature, sufficient for practical purposes, not the kind of heat which has recently come into
fashion, more like that of a furnace  so much so indeed that a slave convicted on a criminal
charge might well be sentenced to be bathed alive! There doesnt seem to me to be any
difference now between your baths warm and your baths boiling.
How primitive! Such is some peoples verdict these days on Scipio because he did not
have extensive areas of glass to let the daylight into the perspiring room, because it was not a
habit with him to stew in strong sunlight, letting the time go by until he was perfectly cooked in
his own bathroom. What a sorry wretch of a man! He didnt know how to live! Hed take his
bath in water that was never filtered and often cloudy, practically muddy in fact after any heavy
rain. Well, it did not make much difference to Scipio if this was the kind of bath he had; he went
there to wash off sweat, not scent. And what do you think some people will say to this? Well, I 
dont envy Scipio; if that was the kind of bath he had all the time, it was a real exiles life that he
was leading.
Yes, and whats more, if you must know, he didnt even have a bath every day. Writers
who have left us a record of life in ancient Rome tell us that it was just their arms and legs,
which of course they dirtied working, that people washed every day, bathing all over only once a
week on market day. Obviously, someone will comment, there must have been times when
they were positively disgusting. And what do you think they stank of? Ill tell you  of hard
soldiering, of hard work, of all that goes to make up a man. Men are dirtier creatures now than
they ever were in the days before the coming of spotlessly clean bathrooms. What is it Horace
says when he wants to describe a man noted and indeed notorious for the inordinate lengths to
which he carried personal fastidiousness?
Bucillus stinks of scented lozenges.*
Produce Bucillus today and he might just as well stink like a goat. He would be in the
same position as the Gargonius with whom Horace contrasted him. For nowadays it is not even
enough to use some scented ointment  it must be reapplied two or three times a day as a
precaution against its evaporation on the person. I say nothing about the way people preen
themselves on the perfume it carries, as if it were their own.
If all this strikes you as being excessively disapproving you must put it down to the
houses atmosphere! During my stay in it Ive learnt from Aegialus (whos the present owner of
the estate, and gives a great deal of attention to its management) that trees can be transplanted
even when quite old  a lesson that we old men need to learn when we reckon that every one of
us who puts down a new olive plantation is doing so for someone elses benefit  now that Ive
seen him carefully transplanting one of a number of trees that had given fruit unstintingly over
three and even four seasons. So you too can enjoy the shade of the tree which
Is slow in coming up, is there to give
Your grandsons shade in later years, long hence,*
according to our Virgil, who was not concerned with the facts but with poetic effect, his
object being the pleasure of the reader, not the instruction of the farmer. To pick out only one
example, let me quote the following passage which I felt compelled to find fault with today.
In Springs the time for sowing beans; then, too,
The crumbling furrows, Clover, welcome you,
And millet, too, receives her yearly care.
I leave you to conclude from this whether the crops mentioned are to be planted at the
same time as each other, and whether in each case theyre to be sown in spring. As I write, its
June, getting on for July now, too, and Ive seen people harvesting beans and sowing millet on
the same day.
To get back to our olive plantation, I saw two different methods of planting used here. In
the first, taking sizeable trees and lopping off the branches, cutting them back to a foot from the
stem, Aegialus transplanted them complete with crown, pruning away the roots and leaving only
the actual base, the part to which the roots are attached. This he placed in the hole with an
application of manure, and not only earthed it in but trod and stamped the soil down hard. He
says that nothing gives such good results as this packing them down, as he calls it; what it does,
of course, is to keep out cold and wind; and apart from that, the tree is less liable to be shifted,
thus allowing the young roots to sprout and get a grip on the soil when they are inevitably tender
and torn from their precarious holds by the slightest disturbance. He also scrapes the crown of
the tree before covering it up, because (he says) new roots emerge wherever the wood 
underneath has been laid bare. The tree, again, should not stand higher than three or four feet
above the ground. This will ensure, right from the start, green growth from the bottom upwards
instead of a large area of dry and withered stem of the sort one sees in old olive-groves.
The second method was as follows: taking branches of the type one normally finds on
very young trees, strong but at the same time having soft bark, he planted them out in the same
sort of way. These grow rather more slowly but since they spring from what is virtually a cutting,
there is nothing scraggy or unsightly about them.
Another thing Ive seen is the transplanting of an old vine from its supporting tree; in this
case, one has to gather up with it, if possible, even the minute root-hairs, and in addition give it a
more generous covering of soil so that it throws out roots from the stem as well. I have seen such
plantings not only in the month of February but even at the end of March, the vines going on to
embrace and take good hold of their new elm trees. Aegialus also says that all trees which are
stout in the stem, if one may so term them, should have the benefit of a supply of water stored in
tanks; if this is a success, we have brought the rain under our control.
But I dont propose to tell you any more, in case I turn you into a rival grower in the
same way as Aegialus has turned me into a competitor of his!
LETTER LXXXVIII
YOU want to know my attitude towards liberal studies. Well, I have no respect for any
study whatsoever if its end is the making of money. Such studies are to me unworthy ones. They
involve the putting out of skills to hire, and are only of value in so far as they may develop the
mind without occupying it for long. Time should be spent on them only so long as ones mental
abilities are not up to dealing with higher things. They are our apprenticeship, not our real work.
Why liberal studies are so called is obvious: it is because they are the ones considered worthy
of a free man.* But there is really only one liberal study that deserves the name  because it
makes a person free  and that is the pursuit of wisdom. Its high ideals, its steadfastness and
spirit make all other studies puerile and puny in comparison. Do you really think there is
anything to be said for the others when you find among the people who profess to teach them
quite the most reprehensible and worthless characters you could have as teachers? All right to
have studied that sort of thing once, but not to be studying them now.
The question has sometimes been posed whether these liberal studies make a man a better
person. But in fact they do not aspire to any knowledge of how to do this, let alone claim to do it.
Literary scholarship concerns itself with research into language, or history if a rather broader
field is preferred, or, extending its range to the very limit, poetry. Which of these paves the way
to virtue? Attentiveness to words, analysis of syllables, accounts of myths, laying down the
principles of prosody? What is there in all this that dispels fear, roots out desire or reins in
passion? Or let us take a look at music, at geometry; you will not find anything in them which
tells us not to be afraid of this or desire that  and if anyone lacks this kind of knowledge all his
other knowledge is valueless to him. The question is whether or not that sort of scholar is
teaching virtue. For if he is not, he will not even be imparting it incidentally. If he is teaching it
he is a philosopher. If you really want to know how far these persons are from the position of
being moral teachers, observe the absence of connexion between all the things they study; if they
were teaching one and the same thing a connexion would be evident. Unless perhaps they
manage to persuade you that Homer was actually a philosopher  though they refute their case by
means of the very passages which lead them to infer it. For at one moment they make him a
Stoic, giving nothing but virtue his approval, steering clear of pleasure, not even an offer of
immortality inducing him to stoop to the dishonourable; at another they make him an Epicurean,
praising the way of life of a society passing its days at peace and ease, in an atmosphere of
dinner-parties and music-making; at another he becomes a Peripatetic, with a threefold
classification of things good; at another an Academic, stating that nothing is certain. It is obvious
that none of these philosophies is to be found in Homer for the very reason that they all are, the
doctrines being mutually incompatible. Even suppose we grant these people that Homer was a
philosopher, he became a wise man, surely, before he could recite any epics, so that what we
should be learning are the things which made him wise. And there is no more point in my
investigating which was the earlier, Homer or Hesiod, than there would be in my knowing the
reason why Hecuba, though younger than Helen, carried her years so unsuccessfully. And what, I
would ask this kind of scholar, do you suppose is the point of trying to establish the ages of
Patroclus and Achilles? And are you more concerned to find out where Ulysses wanderings took
him than to find a way of putting an end to our own perpetual wanderings? We havent the time
to spare to hear whether it was between Italy and Sicily that he ran into a storm or somewhere
outside the area of the world we know  wanderings as extensive as his could never in fact have
taken place inside so limited an area  when every day were running into our own storms, 
spiritual storms, and driven by vice into all the troubles that Ulysses ever knew. Were not spared
those eye-distracting beauties, or attackers. We too have to contend in various places with savage
monsters revelling in human blood, insidious voices that beguile our ears, shipwrecks and all
manner of misfortune. What you should be teaching me is how I may attain such a love for my
country, my father and my wife, and keep on course for those ideals even after shipwreck. Why
go into the question whether or not Penelope completely took in her contemporaries and was far
from being a model of wifely purity, any more than the question whether or not she had a feeling
that the man she was looking at was Ulysses before she actually knew it? Teach me instead what
purity is, how much value there is in it, whether it lies in the body or in the mind.
Turning to the musical scholar I say this. You teach me how bass and treble harmonize,
or how strings producing different notes can give rise to concord. I would rather you brought
about some harmony in my mind and got my thoughts into tune. You show me which are the
plaintive keys. I would rather you showed me how to avoid uttering plaintive notes when things
go against me in life.
The geometrician teaches me how to work out the size of my estates  rather than how to
work out how much a man needs in order to have enough. He teaches me to calculate, putting my
fingers into the service of avarice, instead of teaching me that there is no point whatsoever in that
sort of computation and that a person is none the happier for having properties which tire
accountants out, or to put it another way, how superfluous a mans possessions are when he
would be a picture of misery if you forced him to start counting up single-handed how much he
possessed. What use is it to me to be able to divide a piece of land into equal areas if Im unable
to divide it with a brother? What use is the ability to measure out a portion of an acre with an
accuracy extending even to the bits which elude the measuring rod if Im upset when some
high-handed neighbour encroaches slightly on my property? The geometrician teaches me how I
may avoid losing any fraction of my estates, but what I really want to learn is how to lose the lot
and still keep smiling. But Im being turned off the land my father and grandfather owned
before me! Well, so what? Who owned the land before your grandfather? Are you in a position
to identify the community, let alone the individual, to whom it originally belonged? You entered
on it as a tenant, not an absolute owner. Whose tenant, you may ask? Your heirs, and that only if
youre lucky. The legal experts say that acquisition by prescription never applies where the
property concerned is actually public property. Well, what you possess and call your own is
really public property, or mankinds property for that matter. Oh, the marvels of geometry! You
geometers can calculate the areas of circles, can reduce any given shape to a square, can state the
distances separating stars. Nothings outside your scope when it comes to measurement. Well, if
youre such an expert, measure a mans soul; tell me how large or how small that is. You can
define a straight line; what use is that to you if youve no idea what straightness means in life?
I come now to the person who prides himself on his familiarity with the heavenly bodies:
Towards which quarter chilly Saturn draws,
The orbits in which burning Mercury roams.*
What is to be gained from this sort of knowledge? Am I supposed to feel anxious when
Saturn and Mars are in opposition or Mercury sets in the evening in full view of Saturn, instead
of coming to learn that bodies like these are equally propitious wherever they are, and incapable
of change in any case. They are swept on in a path from which they cannot escape, their motion
governed by an uninterrupted sequence of destined events, making their reappearances in cycles
that are fixed. They either actuate or signalize all that comes about in the universe. If every event
is brought about by them, how is mere familiarity with a process which is unchangeable going to 
be of any help? If they are pointers to events, what difference does it make to be aware in
advance of things you cannot escape? They are going to happen whether you know about them
or not.
If you observe the hasting sun and watch
The stars processing through the skies, the day
That follows will not prove you wrong; nor will
Deceptive cloudfree nights then take you in.*
Ive taken sufficient precautions, more than sufficient precautions, to ensure that Im not
taken in by deceptive phenomena. At this youll protest: Can you really say the day that
follows never proves me wrong? Surely anything that happens which one didnt know in
advance was going to happen proves one wrong? Well, I dont know whats going to happen;
but I do know whats capable of happening  and none of this will give rise to any protest on my
part. Im ready for everything. If Im let off in any way, Im pleased. The day in question proves
me wrong in a sense if it treats me leniently, but even so not really wrong, for just as I know that
anything is capable of happening so also do I know that its not bound to happen. So I look for
the best and am prepared for the opposite.
Youll have to bear with me if I digress here. Nothing will induce me to accept painters
into the list of liberal arts, any more than sculptors, marble-masons and all the other attendants
on extravagance. I must equally reject those oil and dust practitioners, the wrestlers, or else I
shall have to include in the list the perfumers and cooks and all the others who place their talents
at the service of our pleasures. What is there, I ask you, thats liberal about those characters who
vomit up their food to empty their stomachs for more, with their bodies stuffed full and their
minds all starved and inactive? Can we possibly look on this as a liberal accomplishment for the
youth of Rome, whom our ancestors trained to stand up straight and throw a javelin, to toss the
caber, and manage a horse, and handle weapons? They never used to teach their children
anything which could be learned in a reclining posture. That kind of training, nevertheless,
doesnt teach or foster moral values any more than the other. Whats the use, after all, of
mastering a horse and controlling him with the reins at full gallop if youre carried away yourself
by totally unbridled emotions? Whats the use of overcoming opponent after opponent in the
wrestling or boxing rings if you can be overcome by your temper?
So we dont, you may ask, in fact gain anything from the liberal studies? As far as
character is concerned, no, but we gain a good deal from them in other directions  just as even
these admittedly inferior arts which weve been talking about, the ones that are based on use of
the hands, make important contributions to the amenities of life although they have nothing to do
with character. Why then do we give our sons a liberal education? Not because it can make them
morally good but because it prepares the mind for the acquisition of moral values. Just as that
grounding in grammar, as they called it in the old days, in which boys are given their elementary
schooling, does not teach them the liberal arts but prepares the ground for knowledge of them in
due course, so when it comes to character the liberal arts open the way to it rather than carry the
personality all the way there.*
In this connexion I feel prompted to take a look at individual qualities of character.
Bravery is the one which treats with contempt things ordinarily inspiring fear, despising and
defying and demolishing all the things that terrify us and set chains on human freedom. Is she in
any way fortified by liberal studies? Take loyalty, the most sacred quality that can be found in a
human breast, never corrupted by a bribe, never driven to betray by any form of compulsion,
crying: Beat me, burn me, put me to death, I shall not talk  the more the torture probes my 
secrets the deeper Ill hide them! Can liberal studies create that kind of spirit? Take self-control,
the quality which takes command of the pleasures; some she dismisses out of hand, unable to
tolerate them; others she merely regulates, ensuring that they are brought within healthy limits;
never approaching pleasures for their own sake, she realizes that the ideal limit with things you
desire is not the amount you would like to but the amount you ought to take. Humanity is the
quality which stops one being arrogant towards ones fellows, or being acrimonious. In words, in
actions, in emotions she reveals herself as kind and good-natured towards all. To her the troubles
of anyone else are her own, and anything that benefits herself she welcomes primarily because it
will be of benefit to someone else. Do the liberal studies inculcate these attitudes? No, no more
than they do simplicity, or modesty and restraint, or frugality and thrift, or mercy, the mercy that
is as sparing with anothers blood as though it were its own, knowing that it is not for man to
make wasteful use of man.
Someone will ask me how I can say that liberal studies are of no help towards morality
when Ive just been saying that theres no attaining morality without them. My answer would be
this: theres no attaining morality without food either, but theres no connexion between morality
and food. The fact that a ship cant begin to exist without the timbers of which its built doesnt
mean that the timbers are of help to it. Theres no reason for you to assume that, X being
something without which Y could never have come about, Y came about as a result of the
assistance of X. And indeed it can actually be argued that the attainment of wisdom is perfectly
possible without the liberal studies; although moral values are things which have to be learnt,
they are not learnt through these studies. Besides, what grounds could I possibly have for
supposing that a person who has no acquaintance with books will never be a wise man? For
wisdom does not lie in books. Wisdom publishes not words but truths  and Im not sure that the
memory isnt more reliable when it has no external aids to fall back on.
There is nothing small or cramped about wisdom. It is something calling for a lot of room
to move. There are questions to be answered concerning physical as well as human matters,
questions about the past and about the future, questions about things eternal and things
ephemeral, questions about time itself. On this one subject of time just look how many questions
there are. To start with, does it have an existence of its own? Next, does anything exist prior to
time, independently of it? Did it begin with the universe, or did it exist even before then on the
grounds that there was something in existence before the universe? There are countless questions
about the soul alone  where it comes from, what its nature is, when it begins to exist, and how
long it is in existence; whether it passes from one place to another, moving house, so to speak, on
transfer to successive living creatures, taking on a different form with each, or is no more than
once in service and is then released to roam the universe; whether it is a corporeal substance or
not; what it will do when it ceases to act through us, how it will employ its freedom once it has
escaped its cage here; whether it will forget its past and become conscious of its real nature from
the actual moment of its parting from the body and departure for its new home on high.
Whatever the field of physical or moral sciences you deal with, you will be given no rest by the
mass of things to be learnt or investigated. And to enable matters of this range and scale to find
unrestricted hospitality in our minds, everything superfluous must be turned out. Virtue will not
bring herself to enter the limited space we offer her; something of great size requires plenty of
room. Let everything else be evicted, and your heart completely opened to her.
But its a nice thing, surely, to be familiar with a lot of subjects. Well, in that case let us
retain just as much of them as we need. Would you consider a person open to criticism for
putting superfluous objects on the same level as really useful ones by arranging on display in his 
house a whole array of costly articles, but not for cluttering himself up with a lot of superfluous
furniture in the way of learning? To want to know more than is sufficient is a form of
intemperance. Apart from which this kind of obsession with the liberal arts turns people into
pedantic, irritating, tactless, self-satisfied bores, not learning what they need simply because they
spend their time learning things they will never need. The scholar Didymus wrote four thousand
works: I should feel sorry for him if he had merely read so many useless works. In these works
he discusses such questions as Homers origin, who was Aeneas real mother, whether
Anacreons manner of life was more that of a lecher or that of a drunkard, whether Sappho slept
with anyone who asked her, and other things that would be better unlearned if one actually knew
them! Dont you go and tell me now that life is long enough for this sort of thing! When you
come to writers in our own school, for that matter, Ill show you plenty of works which could do
with some ruthless pruning. It costs a person an enormous amount of time (and other peoples
ears an enormous amount of boredom) before he earns such compliments as What a learned
person! Lets be content with the much less fashionable label, What a good man!*
What about thinking how much time you lose through constantly being taken up with
official matters, private matters or ordinary everyday matters, through sleep, through ill health?
Measure your life: it just does not have room for so much.
I have been speaking about liberal studies. Yet look at the amount of useless and
superfluous matter to be found in the philosophers. Even they have descended to the level of
drawing distinctions between the uses of different syllables and discussing the proper meanings
of prepositions and conjunctions. They have come to envy the philologist and the mathematician,
and they have taken over all the inessential elements in those studies  with the result that they
know more about devoting care and attention to their speech than about devoting such attention
to their lives. Listen and let me show you the sorry consequences to which subtlety carried too
far can lead, and what an enemy it is to truth. Protagoras declares that it is possible to argue
either side of any question with equal force, even the question whether or not one can equally
argue either side of any question! Nausiphanes declares that of the things which appear to us to
exist, none exists any more than it does not exist. Parmenides declares that of all these
phenomena none exists except the whole. Zeno of Elea has dismissed all such difficulties by
introducing another; he declares that nothing exists. The Pyrrhonean, Megarian, Eretrian and
Academic schools pursue more or less similar lines; the last named have introduced a new
branch of knowledge, non-knowledge.
Well, all these theories you should just toss on top of that heap of superfluous liberal
studies. The people I first mentioned provide me with knowledge which is not going to be of any
use to me, while the others snatch away from me any hopes of ever acquiring any knowledge at
all. Superfluous knowledge would be preferable to no knowledge. One side offers me no guiding
light to direct my vision towards the truth, while the other just gouges my eyes out. If I believe
Protagoras there is nothing certain in the universe; if I believe Nausiphanes there is just the one
certainty, that nothing is certain; if Parmenides, only one thing exists; if Zeno, not even one.
Then what are we? The things that surround us, the things on which we live, what are they? Our
whole universe is no more than a semblance of reality, perhaps a deceptive semblance, perhaps
one without substance altogether. I should find it difficult to say which of these people annoy me
most, those who would have us know nothing or the ones who refuse even to leave us the small
satisfaction of knowing that we know nothing.
LETTER XC
WHO can doubt, my dear Lucilius, that life is the gift of the immortal gods, but that
living well is the gift of philosophy? A corollary of this would be the certain conclusion that our
debt to philosophy is greater than the debt we owe to the gods (by just so much as a good life is
more of a blessing than, simply, life) had it not been for the fact that philosophy itself was
something bestowed by the gods. They have given no one the present of a knowledge of
philosophy, but everyone the means of acquiring it. For if they had made philosophy a blessing
given to all and sundry, if we were born in a state of moral enlightenment, wisdom would have
been deprived of the best thing about her  that she isnt one of the things which fortune either
gives us or doesnt As things are, there is about wisdom a nobility and magnificence in the fact
that she doesnt just fall to a persons lot, that each man owes her to his own efforts, that one
doesnt go to anyone other than oneself to find her. What would you have worth looking up to in
philosophy if she were handed out free?
Philosophy has the single task of discovering the truth about the divine and human
worlds. The religious conscience, the sense of duty, justice and all the rest of the close-knit,
interdependent company of virtues, never leave her side. Philosophy has taught men to worship
what is divine, to love what is human, telling us that with the gods belongs authority, and among
human beings fellowship. That fellowship lasted for a long time intact, before mens greed broke
society up  and impoverished even those she had brought most riches; for people cease to
possess everything as soon as they want everything for themselves.
The first men on this earth, however, and their immediate descendants, followed nature
unspoiled; they took a single person as their leader and their law, freely submitting to the
decisions of an individual of superior merit. It is natures way to subordinate the worse to the
better. With dumb animals, indeed, the ones who dominate the group are either the biggest or the
fiercest. The bull who leads the herd is not the weakling, but the one whose bulk and brawn has
brought it victory over the other males. In a herd of elephants the tallest is the leader. Among
human beings the highest merit means the highest position. So they used to choose their ruler for
his character. Hence peoples were supremely fortunate when among them a man could never be
more powerful than others unless he was a better man than they were. For there is nothing
dangerous in a mans having as much power as he likes if he takes the view that he has power to
do only what it is his duty to do.
In that age, then, which people commonly refer to as the Golden Age, government, so
Posidonius maintains, was in the hands of the wise. They kept the peace, protected the weaker
from the stronger, urged and dissuaded, pointed out what was advantageous and what was not.
Their ability to look ahead ensured that their peoples never went short of anything, whilst their
bravery averted dangers and their devotedness brought well-being and prosperity to their
subjects. To govern was to serve, not to rule. No one used to try out the extent of his power over
those to whom he owed that power in the first place. And no one had either reason or inclination
to perpetrate injustice, since people governing well were equally well obeyed, and a king could
issue no greater threat to disobedient subjects than that of his own abdication.
But with the gradual infiltration of the vices and the resultant transformation of kingships
into tyrannies, the need arose for laws, laws which were themselves, to begin with, drafted by the
wise. Solon, who established Athens as a democratic state, was one of the seven men of antiquity
celebrated for their wisdom. If the same age had produced Lycurgus, an eighth name would have
been added to that revered number. The laws of Zaleucus and Charondas are still admired. And it
was not in public life or in the chambers of lawyers that these two men learnt the constitutional
principles which they were to establish in Sicily (then in its heyday) and throughout the Greek 
areas of Italy, but in the secret retreat, now hallowed and famous, of Pythagoras.
Thus far I agree with Posidonius. But that philosophy discovered the techniques
employed in everyday life, that I refuse to admit. I will not claim for philosophy a fame that
belongs to technology. It was philosophy, says Posidonius, that taught men how to raise
buildings at a time when they were widely dispersed and their shelter consisted of huts or
burrowed-out cliffs or hollowed tree trunks. I for my part cannot believe that philosophy was
responsible for the invention of these modern feats of engineering that rise up storey after storey,
or the cities of today crowding one against the next, any more than of our fish-tanks, those
enclosures designed to save mens gluttony from having to run the risk of storms and to ensure
extravagance safe harbours of her own, however wildly the high seas may be raging, in which to
fatten separately the different kinds of fish. Are you really going to tell me that philosophy
taught the world to use keys and bolts on doors  which was surely nothing but a signal for
greed? Was it philosophy that reared the towering buildings we know today, with all the danger
they mean to the people living in them? It was not enough, presumably, for man to avail himself
of whatever cover came to hand, to have found a shelter of some kind or other in nature without
trouble and without the use of skills. Believe me, that age before there ever existed architects or
builders was a happy age. The squaring off of timbers, the accurate cutting of beams with a saw
that travels along a marked out line, all these things came in with extravagance.
The first of men with wedges split their wood.*
Yes, for they were not preparing a roof for a future banqueting-hall; and pines or firs
were not continually being drawn through streets trembling at their passage on a long convoy of
vehicles to support panelled ceilings heavy with gold. Their huts were held up by a forked pole
stood at either end, and with close-packed branches and a sloping pile of leaves a run-off was
arranged for even heavy rains. This was the kind of roof under which they lived and yet their
lives were free of care. For men in a state of freedom had thatch for their shelter, while slavery
dwells beneath marble and gold.
Another matter on which I disagree with Posidonius is his belief that it was by wise men
that tools were originally invented. On that sort of basis there is nothing to stop him saying that it
was by philosophers that
Discovered next were ways of snaring game,
Of catching birds with lime, of setting dogs
All round deep woods.*
It was human ingenuity, not wisdom, which discovered all that. I disagree with him again
where he maintains that it was wise men who discovered iron and copper mining (when the earth
had been scorched by a forest fire and had melted to produce a flow from surface veins of ore).
The person who discovers that sort of thing is the kind of person who makes it his business to be
interested in just that sort of thing. Nor, for that matter, do I find it as nice a question as
Posidonius does, whether the hammer started to come into general use before the tongs or the
other way round. They were both invented by some individual of an alert, perceptive turn of
mind, but not one with the qualities of greatness or of inspiration. And the same applies to
anything else the quest of which involves a bent back and an earthward gaze.
The wise man then followed a simple way of life  which is hardly surprising when you
consider how even in this modern age he seeks to be as little encumbered as he possibly can.
How, I ask you, can you consistently admire both Daedalus and Diogenes? Tell me which of
these two you would say was a wise man, the one who hit on the saw, or the one who on seeing a
boy drinking water from the hollow of his hand, immediately took the cup out of his knapsack 
and smashed it, telling himself off for his stupidity in having superfluous luggage about him all
that time, and curled himself up in a jar56 and went to sleep. And today just tell me which of the
following you consider the wiser man: the one who discovers a means of spraying saffron
perfumes to a tremendous height from hidden pipes, who fills or empties channels in one sudden
rush of water, who constructs a set of interchangeable ceilings for a dining room in such a way as
to produce a constant succession of different patterns, with a change of ceiling at each course?
Or the one who proves to others and to himself that nature makes no demand on us that is
difficult or hard to meet and that we can live without the marble-worker and the engineer, that
we can clothe ourselves without importing silks, that we can have the things we need for our
ordinary purposes if we will only be content with what the earth has made available on its
surface. If they only cared to listen to this man, the human race would realize that cooks are as
unnecessary to them as are soldiers.
That race of men to whom taking care of the body was a straightforward enough matter
were, if not philosophers, something very like it. The things that are essential are acquired with
little bother; it is the luxuries that call for toil and effort. Follow nature and you will feel no need
of craftsmen. It was natures desire that we should not be kept occupied this. She equipped us for
everything she required us to contend with. But the naked body cant stand cold. So what? Are
the skins of wild beasts and other creatures not capable of giving us more than adequate
protection against the cold? Is it not a fact that many peoples make a covering for their bodies
out of bark, that feathers are sewn together to serve as clothing, that even today the majority of
the Scythians wear the pelts of fox and mice, which are soft to the touch and impervious to
wind? Are you going to tell me too that any people you care to mention never used their hands to
weave a basketwork of wattles, smear it all over with common mud and then cover the whole
roof with long grass-stems and other material growing wild, and went through winter weather,
the rains streaming down the slopes of the roof, without any worry? But we need some pretty
dense shade to keep off the heat of the sun in summer. So what? Have past ages not left us
plenty of hiding places that have been carved out by the ravages of time, or whatever other cause
one cares to suppose, and have developed into caves? And again, is it not a fact that Syrtian
tribes take shelter in pits dug in the ground, as do other people who, because of extreme sun
temperatures, find nothing less than the baked earth itself sufficiently substantial as a protective
covering against the heat? When nature granted all the other animals a simple passage through
life, she was not so unfair to man as to make it impossible for him, for him alone, to live without
all these skills. Nature demanded nothing hard from us, and nothing needs painful contriving to
enable life to be kept going. We were born into a world in which things were ready to our hands;
it is we who have made everything difficult to come by through our own disdain for what is
easily come by. Shelter and apparel and the means of warming body and food, all the things
which nowadays entail tremendous trouble, were there for the taking, free to all, obtainable at
trifling effort. With everything the limit corresponded to the need. It is we, and no one else, who
have made those same things costly, spectacular and obtainable only by means of a large number
of full-scale techniques.
Nature suffices for all she asks of us. Luxury has turned her back on nature, daily urging
herself on and growing through all the centuries, pressing mens intelligence into the
development of the vices. First she began to hanker after things that were inessential, and then
after things that were injurious, and finally she handed the mind over to the body and
commanded it to be the out and out slave of the bodys whim and pleasure. All those trades that
give rise to noise or hectic activity in the city are in business for the body, which was once in the 
position of the slave, having everything issued to it, and is now the master, having everything
procured for it. This is the starting point for textile and engineering workshops, for the perfumes
used by chefs, the sensual movements of our dancing teachers, even sensual and unmanly songs.
And why? Because the bounds of nature, which set a limit to mans wants by relieving them only
where there is necessity for such relief, have been lost sight of; to want simply what is enough
nowadays suggests to people primitiveness and squalor.
It is incredible, Lucilius, how easily even great men can be carried away from the truth by
the sheer pleasure of holding forth on a subject. Look at Posidonius, in my opinion one of those
who have contributed most to philosophy, when he wants to give a description of how, in the
first place, some threads are twisted and others drawn out from the soft, loose hank of wool, then
how the warp has its threads stretched perpendicularly by means of hanging weights, and how
the weft (worked in to soften the hard texture of the warp threads which compress it on either
side) is made compact and close by means of the batten; he declares that philosophers invented
the art of the weaver too, forgetting that philosophers had disappeared by the time this
comparatively advanced type of weaving in which
The warp is bound to the beam, and then its threads
Are parted by the reed, the woof worked in
Between with pointed shuttles and pressed home
By the broad combs fretted teeth*
had been evolved. He might have thought differently if he had only had the opportunity
of seeing the looms of the present day, the end product of which is clothing which is not going to
conceal a thing, clothing which is no help to modesty let alone the body! He then goes on to
farmers, and gives an equally eloquent description of how the soil is broken up by the plough for
the first time and then gone over again in order that the earth, this loosened, may allow the roots
more room to develop, and continues with the sowing of the seed and the lifting of the weeds to
prevent any stray wild plants springing up and ruining the crop. All this, too, he represents as
being the work of philosophers, as if agriculturists were not, now as ever, discovering plenty of
new methods of increasing the soils productivity.
Not content with these occupations, he proceeds to demean the philosopher to the bakery;
he tells us how by imitating nature he began producing bread. The grain, he says, is taken into
the mouth and crushed by the coming together of the hard surfaces of the teeth; anything that
escapes is carried back to the teeth again by the tongue, and the grain is finally mixed with saliva
to enable it to pass down the lubricated throat with greater facility; on reaching the stomach,
where it is cooked in an even heat, it is finally absorbed into the system. Taking this process as a
model, someone or other placed one rough stone on top of another in imitation of the teeth, one
set of which remains immobile and awaits the action of the other; the grains are then crushed by
the friction of the one against the other, and are constantly re-subjected to it until they are
reduced by this repeated grinding to a fine powder. He then sprinkled the resulting meal with
water, and by going on manipulating it he made it plastic, and shaped it into the form of a loaf.
This he first baked in a glowing hot earthenware vessel in hot ashes; later came the gradual
discovery of ovens and other devices the heat of which is controllable at will. Posidonius was
not far off maintaining that the shoemakers trade as well was invented by philosophers!
Now all these things were indeed discovered by the exercise of reason, but not by reason
in its perfect form. They were invented by ordinary men, not by philosophers  just as, let me
add, were the vessels we cross rivers and seas in, with sails designed to catch the drive of the
winds and rudders at the stern to alter the vessels course in this or that direction (the idea being 
taken from the fish, who steers with his tail, one slight movement of it to either side being
enough to alter the direction of his darting course). All these things, says Posidonius, were
invented by our philosopher. They were, however, rather too unimportant for him to handle
personally, and so he passed them over to the minions among his assistants. No, the fact is that
this sort of thing was not thought up by anyone other than the people who make them their
concern today. We know very well that some have only appeared within living memory, the use,
for example, of windows letting in the full daylight through transparent panes, or bathrooms
heated from beneath with pipes set in the walls in order to diffuse the heat and this maintain an
even temperature at the highest as well as the lowest room levels. Need I mention the marble
with which our temples and even houses are resplendent? Or the rounded and polished blocks on
which we rest whole colonnades and buildings capable of holding large crowds of people? Or the
shorthand symbols by means of which even a rapidly delivered speech is taken down and the
hand is able to keep up with the quickness of the tongue? These are inventions of the lowest
slaves. Philosophy is far above all this; she does not train mens hands: she is the instructress of
mens minds.
You want to know, do you, what philosophy has unearthed, what philosophy has
achieved? It is not the gracefulness of dance movements, nor the variety of sounds produced by
horn or flute as they take in breath and transform it, in its passage through or out of the
instrument, into notes. She does not set about constructing arms or walls or anything of use in
war. On the contrary, her voice is for peace, calling all mankind to live in harmony. And she is
not, I insist, the manufacturer of equipment for everyday essential purposes. Why must you make
her responsible for such insignificant things? In her you see the mistress of the art of life itself.
She has, indeed, authority over other arts, inasmuch as all activities that provide life with its
apparatus must also be the servants of that of which life itself is the servant. Philosophy,
however, takes as her aim the state of happiness. That is the direction in which she opens routes
and guides us. She shows us what are real and what are only apparent evils. She strips mens
minds of empty thinking, bestows a greatness that is solid and administers a check to greatness
where it is puffed up and all an empty show; she sees that we are left in no doubt about the
difference between what is great and what is bloated. And she imparts a knowledge of the whole
of nature, as well as of herself. She explains what the gods are, and what they are like.*
Anacharsis, says Posidonius, discovered the potters wheel, the rotary motion of which
shapes earthenware. Then, mention of the potters wheel being found in Homer, he would have
us think that it is the passage in Homer, rather than his story, that is spurious. I maintain that
Anacharsis was not responsible for this invention, and that even if he was, he discovered it as a
philosopher, yes, but not in his capacity as a philosopher, in the same way as philosophers do
plenty of things as men without doing them in their capacity as philosophers. Suppose, for
example, a philosopher happens to be a very fast runner; in a race he will come first by virtue of
his ability as a runner, not by virtue of his being a philosopher. I should like to show Posidonius
some glass-blower moulding glass by means of his breath into a whole variety of shapes that
could hardly be fashioned by the most careful hand  discoveries that have occurred in the period
since the disappearance of the wise man. Democritus, he says, is reported to be the discoverer
of the arch, the idea of which is to bind a curving line of stones, set at slightly differing angles
from each other, with a keystone. This I should say was quite untrue. For there must have been
both bridges and gateways before Democritus time, and the upper parts of these generally have
a curve to them. And it seems to have escaped your memory, Posidonius, that this same
Democritus discovered a means of softening ivory, and a means of turning a pebble into an 
emerald by boiling it, a method employed even today for colouring certain stones that man has
discovered and found amenable to the process. These techniques may indeed have been
discovered by a philosopher, but not in his capacity as a philosopher. For there are plenty of
things which he does which one sees being done just as well if not with greater skill and
dexterity by persons totally lacking in wisdom.
What has the philosopher investigated? What has the philosopher brought to light? In the
first place, truth and nature (having, unlike the rest of the animal world, followed nature with
more than just a pair of eyes, things slow to grasp divinity); and secondly, a rule of life, in which
he has brought life into line with things universal. And he has taught us not just to recognize but
to obey the gods, and to accept all that happens exactly as if it were an order from above. He has
told us not to listen to false opinions, and has weighed and valued everything against standards
which are true. He has condemned pleasures an inseparable element of which is subsequent
regret, has commended the good things which will always satisfy, and for all to see has made the
man who has no need of luck the luckiest man of all, and the man who is master of himself the
master of all.
The philosophy I speak of is not the one* which takes the citizen out of public life and
the gods out of the world we live in, and hands morality over to pleasure, but the philosophy
which thinks nothing good unless it is honourable, which is incapable of being enticed astray by
the rewards of men or fortune, and the very pricelessness of which lies in the fact that it cannot
be bought at any price. And I do not believe that this philosophy was in existence in that
primitive era in which technical skills were still unknown and useful knowledge was acquired
through actual practical experience, or that it dates from an age that was happy, an age in which
the bounties of nature were freely available for the use of all without discrimination, before
avarice and luxury split human beings up and got them to abandon partnership for plunder. The
men of that era were not philosophers, even if they acted as philosophers are supposed to act.
No other state of man could cause anyone greater admiration; if God were to allow a man to
fashion the things of this earth and allot its peoples their social customs, that man would not be
satisfied with any other system than the one which tradition says existed in those peoples time,
among whom
No farmers tilled ploughed fields; merely to mark
The line of boundaries dividing land
Between its owners was a sin; men shared
Their findings, and the earth herself then gave
All things more freely unsolicited.*
What race of men could be luckier? Share and share alike they enjoyed nature. She saw
to each and every mans requirements for survival like a parent. What it all amounted to was
undisturbed possession of resources owned by the community. I can surely call that race of men
one of unparalleled riches, it being impossible to find a single pauper in it.
Into this ideal state of things burst avarice, avarice which in seeking to put aside some
article or other and appropriate it to its own use, only succeeded in making everything somebody
elses property and reducing its possessions to a fraction of its previously unlimited wealth.
Avarice brought in poverty, by coveting a lot of possessions losing all that it had. This is why
although it may endeavour to make good its losses, may acquire estate after estate by buying out
or forcing out its neighbours, enlarge country properties to the dimensions of whole provinces,
speak of owning some property when it can go on a long tour overseas without once stepping
off its own land, there is no extension of our boundaries that can bring us back to our starting 
point. When we have done everything within our power, we shall possess a great deal: but we
once possessed the world.
The earth herself, untilled, was more productive, her yields being more than ample for the
needs of peoples who did not raid each other. With any of natures products, men found as much
pleasure in showing others what they had discovered as they did in discovering it. No one could
outdo or be outdone by any other. All was equally divided among people living in complete
harmony. The stronger had not yet started laying hands on the weaker; the avaricious person had
not yet started hiding things away, to be hoarded for his own private use, so shutting the next
man off from actual necessities of life; each cared as much about the other as about himself.
Weapons were unused; hands still unstained with human blood had directed their hostility
exclusively against wild beasts.
Protected from the sun in some thick wood, living in some very ordinary shelter under a
covering of leaves preserving them from the rigours of winter or the rain, those people passed
tranquil nights with never a sigh. We in our crimson luxury toss and turn with worry, stabbed by
needling cares. What soft sleep the hard earth gave those people! They had no carved or panelled
ceilings hanging over them. They lay out in the open, with the stars slipping past above them and
the firmament silently conveying onward that mighty work of creation as it was carried headlong
below the horizon in the magnificent pageant of the night sky. And they had clear views by day
as well as by night of this loveliest of mansions, enjoying the pleasure of watching constellations
falling away from the zenith and others rising again from out of sight beneath the horizon. Surely
it was a joy to roam the earth with marvels scattered so widely around one. You now, by
contrast, go pale at every noise your houses make, and if there is a creaking sound you run away
along your frescoed passages in alarm. Those people had no mansions on the scale of towns.
Fresh air and the untrammelled breezes of the open spaces, the unoppressive shade of a tree or
rock, springs of crystal clarity, streams which chose their own course, streams unsullied by the
work of man, by pipes or any other interference with their natural channels, meadows whose
beauty owed nothing to mans art, that was the environment around their dwelling places in the
countryside, dwelling places given a simple countrymans finish. This was a home in conformity
with nature, a home in which one enjoyed living, and which occasioned neither fear of it nor
fears for it, whereas nowadays our own homes count for a large part of our feeling of insecurity.
But however wonderful and guileless the life they led, they were not wise men; this is a
title that has come to be reserved for the highest of all achievements. All the same, I should be
the last to deny that they were men of exalted spirit, only one step removed, so to speak, from the
gods. There can be no doubt that before this earth was worn out it produced a better type of
offspring. But though they all possessed a character more robust than that of today, and one with
a greater aptitude for hard work, it is equally true that their personalities fell short of genuine
perfection. For nature does not give a man virtue: the process of becoming a good man is an art.
Certainly they did not go in search of gold or silver or the various crystalline stones to be found
in the nethermost dregs of the earth. They were still merciful even to dumb animals. Man was far
and away from killing man, not out of fear or provocation, but simply for entertainment. They
had yet to wear embroidered clothing, and had yet to have gold woven into robes, or even mine
it. But the fact remains that their innocence was due to ignorance and nothing else. And there is a
world of difference between, on the one hand, choosing not to do what is wrong and, on the
other, not knowing how to do it in the first place. They lacked the cardinal virtues of justice,
moral insight, selfcontrol and courage. There were corresponding qualities, in each case not
unlike these, that had a place in their primitive lives; but virtue only comes to a character which 
has been thoroughly schooled and trained and brought to a pitch of perfection by unremitting
practice. We are born for it, but not with it. And even in the best of people, until you cultivate it
there is only the material for virtue, not virtue itself.
LETTER XCI
MY friend Liberalis is in some distress at the present moment following the news of the
complete destruction of Lyons by fire. It is a disaster by which anyone might be shaken, let alone
a person quite devoted to his home town. This event has left him groping for that staunchness of
spirit which, naturally enough, he cultivated when it was a case of facing what to him were
conceivable fears. One is not surprised, though, that there were never any advance fears of such
an unexpected, virtually unheard of catastrophe, considering that there was no precedent for it.
Plenty of cities have suffered damage by fire, but none has ever been blotted out by one. Even
when its buildings have been set aflame by enemy hands, in many places the flames the out, and
even if they are continually rekindled they are seldom so all-consuming as to leave nothing for
tools to demolish. Earthquakes, too, have hardly ever been so ruinous and violent as to raze
whole towns. There has never in fact been a fire so destructive as to leave nothing for a future
fire to consume. But here a single night has laid low a host of architectural splendours any one of
which might have been the glory of a separate city. In the depth of peace there has come such a
blow as could not have been dreaded in war itself. Who would believe it? At a time when
military conflict is in abeyance everywhere, when an international peace covers all parts of the
globe, Lyons, the showpiece of Gaul, is lost to view. Fortune invariably allows those whom she
strikes down in the sight of all a chance to fear what they were going to suffer. The fall of
anything great generally takes time. But here a single night is all there was between a mighty city
and no city at all. It was destroyed in fact in less time than I have taken telling you of its
destruction.
Sturdy and resolute though he is when it comes to facing his own troubles, our Liberalis
has been deeply shocked by the whole thing. And he has some reason to be shaken. What is quite
unlooked for is more crushing in its effect, and unexpectedness adds to the weight of a disaster.
The fact that it was unforeseen has never failed to intensify a persons grief. This is a reason for
ensuring that nothing ever takes us by surprise. We should project our thoughts ahead of us at
every turn and have in mind every possible eventuality instead of only the usual course of events.
For what is there that fortune does not when she pleases fell at the height of its powers? What is
there that is not the more assailed and buffeted by her the more lustrous its attraction? What is
there that is troublesome or difficult for her? Her assaults do not always come along a single
path, or even a well-recognized path. At one time she will call in the aid of our own hands in
attacking us, at another she will be content with her own powers in devising for us dangers for
which no one is responsible. No moment is exempt: in the midst of pleasures there are found the
springs of suffering. In the middle of peace war rears its head, and the bulwarks of ones security
are transformed into sources of alarm, friend turning foe and ally turning enemy. The summers
calm is upset by sudden storms more severe than those of winter. In the absence of any enemy
we suffer all that an enemy might wreak on us. Overmuch prosperity if all else fails will hit on
the instruments of its own destruction. Sickness assails those leading the most sensible lives,
tuberculosis those with the strongest constitutions, retribution the utterly guiltless, violence the
most secluded. Misfortune has a way of choosing some unprecedented means or other of
impressing its power on those who might be said to have forgotten it. A single day strews in
ruins all that was raised by a train of construction extending over a long span of time and 
involving a great number of separate works and a great deal of favour on the part of heaven. To
say a day, indeed, is to put too much of a brake on the calamities that hasten down upon us: an
hour, an instant of time, suffices for the overthrow of empires. It would be some relief to our
condition and our frailty if all things were as slow in their perishing as they were in their coming
into being: but as it is, the growth of things is a tardy process and their undoing is a rapid matter.
Nothing is durable, whether for an individual or for a society; the destinies of men and
cities alike sweep onwards. Terror strikes amid the most tranquil surroundings, and without any
disturbance in the background to give rise to them calamities spring from the least expected
quarter. States which stood firm through civil war as well as wars external collapse without a
hand being raised against them. How few nations have made of their prosperity a lasting thing!
This is why we need to envisage every possibility and to strengthen the spirit to deal with the
things which may conceivably come about. Rehearse them in your mind: exile, torture, war,
shipwreck. Misfortune may snatch you away from your country, or your country away from you,
may banish you into some wilderness  these very surroundings in which the masses suffocate
may become a wilderness. All the terms of our human lot should be before our eyes; we should
be anticipating not merely all that commonly happens but all that is conceivably capable of
happening, if we do not want to be overwhelmed and struck numb by rare events as if they were
unprecedented ones; fortune needs envisaging in a thoroughly comprehensive way. Think how
often towns in Asia or in Greece have fallen at a single earth tremor, how many villages in Syria
or Macedonia have been engulfed, how often this form of disaster has wrought devastation in
Cyprus, how often Paphos has tumbled about itself! Time and again we hear the news of the
annihilation of a whole city, and how small a fraction of mankind are we who hear such news
this often! So let us face up to the blows of circumstance and be aware that whatever happens is
never as serious as rumour makes it out to be.
So a city has burned, a wealthy city and the glory of the provinces of which it was a
feature though it stood in a class of its own, perched as it was on a single hill and that not a hill
of very great dimensions. But time will sweep away the very traces of every one of those cities
of whose splendour and magnificence you nowadays hear. Look at the way the very foundations
of once famous cities of Greece have been eroded by now to the point where nothing is left to
show that they ever even existed. And it is not only the works of human hands that waste away,
nor only structures raised by human skill and industry that the passing days demolish. Mountain
massifs crumble away, whole regions have subsided, the waves have covered landmarks once far
out of sight of the sea. The immense force of volcanic fires that once made the mountain-tops
glow has eaten them away and reduced to lowly stature what once were soaring peaks, reassuring
beacons to the mariner. The works of nature herself suffer. So it is only right that we should bear
the overthrow of cities with resignation. They stand just to fall. Such is the sum total of the end
that awaits them, whether it be the blast of a subterranean explosion throwing off the restraining
weight above it, or the violence of floodwaters increasing to a prodigious degree underground
until it breaks down everything in its way, or a volcanic outburst fracturing the earths crust, or
age (to which nothing is immune) overcoming them little by little, or plague carrying off its
population and causing the deserted area to decay. It would be tedious to recount all the different
ways by which fate may overtake them. One thing I know: all the works of mortal man lie under
sentence of mortality; we live among things that are destined to perish.
Such, then, are the comforting reflections which I would offer our Liberalis, who burns
with a kind of passion beyond belief for his birthplace  which it may be has only been
consumed so as to be called to higher things. A setback has often cleared the way for greater 
prosperity. Many things have fallen only to rise to more exalted heights. That opponent of
affluence in the capital, Timagenes, used to declare that the one reason fires distressed him was
the knowledge that what would rise up afterwards would be of a better standard than what had
burned. In the city of Lyons, too, one may presume that everyone will endeavour to make the
work of restoration a greater, more noble achievement than what they have lost. May that work
be of lasting duration, and may the new foundation be attended by happier auspices with a view
to its lasting for a longer and indeed for all time! This is the hundredth year since the town came
into being, and even for a human being such an age is by no means the uttermost limit. Founded
by Plancus in an area of concentrated population, it owes its growth to its favourable situation:
yet how many grievous blows it has had to suffer in the time it takes for a man to grow old.
So the spirit must be trained to a realization and an acceptance of its lot. It must come to
see that there is nothing fortune will shrink from, that she wields the same authority over
emperor and empire alike and the same power over cities as over men. Theres no ground for
resentment in all this. Weve entered into a world in which these are the terms life is lived on  if
youre satisfied with that, submit to them, if youre not, get out, whatever way you please.
Resent a thing by all means if it represents an injustice decreed against yourself personally; but if
this same constraint is binding on the lowest and the highest alike, then make your peace again
with destiny, the destiny that unravels all ties. Theres no justification for using our graves and
all the variety of monuments we see bordering the highways as a measure of our stature. In the
ashes all men are levelled. Were born unequal, we the equal. And my words apply as much to
cities as to those who live in them. Ardea was taken, and so was Rome. The great lawgiver draws
no distinctions between us according to our birth or the celebrity of our names, save only while
we exist. On the reaching of mortalitys end he declares, Away with snobbery; all that the earth
carries shall forthwith be subject to one law without discrimination. When it comes to all were
required to go through, were equals. No one is more vulnerable than the next man, and no one
can be more sure of his surviving to the morrow.
King Alexander of Macedon once took up the study of geometry  poor fellow, inasmuch
as he would this find out how minute the earth really was, the earth of which he had possessed
himself of a tiny part; yes, poor fellow I call him, for the reason that he was bound to discover
that his title was a false one; for who can be Great in an area of minute dimensions? Anyway,
the points he was being instructed in were of some subtlety and such that the learning of them
demanded the closest concentration, not the sort of thing that would be grasped by a crazed
individual projecting his thoughts across the seas. Teach me, he said, the easy things, to
which his instructor answered, These things are the same for everyone, equally difficult for all.
Well, imagine that nature is saying to you, Those things you grumble about are the same for
everyone. I can give no one anything easier. But anyone who likes may make them easier for
himself. How? By viewing them with equanimity.
You must needs experience pain and hunger and thirst, and grow old (assuming that you
are vouchsafed a relatively long stay among men) and be ill, and suffer loss, and finally perish.
But you neednt believe the chatter of the people around you: theres nothing in all this thats
evil, insupportable or even hard. Those people are afraid of these things by a kind of general
consent. Are you going to feel alarm at death, then, in the same way as you might at some
common report? What could be more foolish than a mans being afraid of peoples words? My
friend Demetrius has a nice way of putting things when he says, as he commonly does, that to
him the utterances of the unenlightened are as noises emanating from the belly. What difference
does it make to me, he asks, whether their rumblings come from their upper or their nether 
regions?
What utter foolishness it is to be afraid that those who have a bad name can rob you of a
good one. Just as the dread aroused in you by some common report has proved groundless, so
too is the dread of things of which you would never be afraid if common report did not tell you
to be. What harm could ever come to a good man from being besmirched by unwarranted
gossip? We shouldnt even let it prejudice us against death, which itself has an evil reputation.
Yet none of the people who malign it has put it to the test. Until one does its rather rash to
condemn a thing one knows nothing about. And yet one thing you do know and that is this, how
many people its a blessing to, how many people it frees from torture, want, maladies, suffering,
weariness. And no one has power over us when death is within our own power.
LETTER CIV
I HAVE got away to my place at Nomentum  getting away from what? Guess. The city?
No, a fever. And just as it was infiltrating my defences, too. It had already taken a hold on me,
my doctor being decided in his opinion that a disturbed, irregular pulse, its natural rhythm upset,
was the start of it. Whereupon I immediately ordered my carriage out, and although my Paulina
tried to hold me back, insisted on driving away. I kept saying the same thing as my mentor Gallio
when he started sickening for a fever in Achaea. He immediately boarded a ship, assuring
everyone that the disorder was to be put down to the place where he was living and not to his
constitution.
I told Paulina this. She is forever urging me to take care of my health; and indeed as I
come to realize the way her very being depends on mine, I am beginning, in my concern for her,
to feel some concern for myself. So although old age has made me better at putting up with a lot
of things, here I am coming to lose this advantage of being old. The notion occurs to me that
inside this old frame there exists a young man as well and one is always less severe on a young
man. The consequence is that since I havent managed to get her to put a little more bravery into
her love for me, she has managed to induce me to show a little more love and care for myself.
For concessions have to be made to legitimate emotions. There are times when, however
pressing ones reasons to the contrary, ones dying breath requires to be summoned back and
held back even as it is passing ones lips, even if this amounts to torture, simply out of
consideration for ones dear ones. The good man should go on living as long as he ought to, not
just as long as he likes. The man who does not value his wife or a friend highly enough to stay on
a little longer in life, who persists in dying in spite of them, is a thoroughly self-indulgent
character. This is a duty which the soul should also impose on itself when it is merely the
convenience of near and dear ones that demands it. And not only if and when it feels the wish to
die, but also if and when it has begun to carry out the wish, it should pause a while to fit in with
their interests.
To return to life for anothers sake is a sign of a noble spirit; it is something that great
men have done on a number of occasions. Yet to give your old age greater care and attentiveness
in the realization that this pleases any of the persons closest to you, or is in their interests, or
would be likely to gratify them (and this in spite of the fact that the greatest reward of that period
is the opportunity it gives you to adopt a relatively carefree attitude towards looking after
yourself and a more adventurous manner of living), is also, to my mind, a mark of the highest
possible kindness. Besides it brings you more than a little pleasure and recompense: for can
anything be sweeter than to find that you are so dear to your wife that this makes you dearer to
yourself? So it comes about that my Paulina succeeds in making me responsible for anxiety of 
my own as well as hers on my behalf.
I expect youre keen to hear what effect it had on my health, this decision of mine to
leave? Well, no sooner had I left behind the oppressive atmosphere of the city and that reek of
smoking cookers which pour out, along with a cloud of ashes, all the poisonous fumes theyve
accumulated in their interiors whenever theyre started up, than I noticed the change in my
condition at once. You can imagine how much stronger I felt after reaching my vineyards! I
fairly waded into my food  talk about animals just turned out on to spring grass! So by now I
am quite my old self again. That feeling of listlessness, being bodily ill at ease and mentally
inefficient, didnt last. Im beginning to get down to some whole-hearted work.
This is not something, however, to which mere surroundings are conducive, unless the
mind is at its own disposal, able at will to provide its own seclusion even in crowded moments.
On the contrary, the man who spends his time choosing one resort after another in a hunt for
peace and quiet, will in every place he visits find something to prevent him from relaxing. The
story is told that someone complained to Socrates that travelling abroad had never done him any
good and received the reply: What else can you expect, seeing that you always take yourself
along with you when you go abroad? What a blessing it would be for some people if they could
only lose themselves ! As things are these persons are a worry and a burden, a source of
demoralization and anxiety, to their own selves. What good does it do you to go overseas, to
move from city to city? If you really want to escape the things that harass you, what youre
needing is not to be in a different place but to be a different person. Suppose youve arrived in
Athens, or suppose its Rhodes  choose any country you like  what difference does the
character of the place make? Youll only be importing your own with you. Youll still look on
wealth as a thing to be valued: your poverty will be causing you torment, while (this being the
most pathetic thing about it all) your poverty will be imaginary. However much you possess
theres someone else who has more, and youll be fancying yourself to be short of things you
need to the exact extent to which you lag behind him. Another thing that youll regard as
something to be valued is success in public life; in which case youre going to feel resentment
when so-and-so is elected consul (or when so-and-so is re-elected for that matter), and be jealous
whenever you see a persons name appearing too often in the honours-lists. Your ambition will
be running at so feverish a pitch that if anyones ahead of you in the race youll see yourself as
coming last.
Death youll think of as the worst of all bad things, though in fact theres nothing bad
about it at all except the thing which comes before it  the fear of it. Youll be scared stiff by
illusory as well as genuine dangers, haunted by imaginary alarms. What good will it do you to
Have found a route past all those Argive forts
And won escape right through the enemys lines?*
Peace itself will supply you with new fears. If your mind has once experienced the shocks
of fright youll no longer have any confidence even in things which are perfectly safe; once it has
acquired the habit of unthinking panic, it is incapable even of attending to its own
self-preservation. For it runs away from dangers instead of taking steps to avert them, and were
far more exposed to them once our backs are turned.
To lose someone you love is something youll regard as the hardest of all blows to bear,
while all the time this will be as silly as crying because the leaves fall from the beautiful trees
that add to the charm of your home. Preserve a sense of proportion in your attitude to everything
that pleases you, and make the most of them while they are at their best. At one moment chance
will carry off one of them, at another moment another; but the falling of the leaves is not difficult 
to bear, since they grow again, and it is no more hard to bear the loss of those whom you love
and regard as brightening your existence; for even if they do not grow again they are replaced
But their successors will never be quite the same No, and neither will you. Every day, every
hour sees a change in you, although the ravages of time are easier to see in others; in your own
case they are far less obvious, because to you they do not show. While other people are snatched
away from us, we are being filched away surreptitiously from ourselves.
Are you never going to give any of these considerations any thought and never going to
apply any healing treatment to your wounds, instead of sowing the seeds of worry for yourself by
hoping for this or that, or despairing of obtaining this or that other thing? If youre sensible
youll run the two together, and never hope without an element of despair, never despair without
an element of hope.
What good has travel of itself ever been able to do anyone? It has never acted as a check
on pleasure or a restraining influence on desires; it has never controlled the temper of an angry
man or quelled the reckless impulses of a lover; never in fact has it rid the personality of a fault.
It has not granted us the gift of judgement, it has not put an end to mistaken attitudes. All it has
ever done is distract us for a little while, through the novelty of our surroundings, like children
fascinated by something they havent come across before. The instability, moreover, of a mind
which is seriously unwell, is aggravated by it, the motion itself increasing the fitfulness and
restlessness. This explains why people, after setting out for a place with the greatest of
enthusiasm, are often more enthusiastic about getting away from it; like migrant birds, they fly
on, away even quicker than they came.
Travel will give you a knowledge of other countries, it will show you mountains whose
outlines are quite new to you, stretches of unfamiliar plains, valleys watered by perennial
streams; it will allow you to observe the unique features of this or that river, the way in which,
for example, the Nile rises in summer flood, or the Tigris vanishes from sight and at the
completion of its journey through hidden subterranean regions is restored to view with its
volume undiminished, or the way the Meander, theme of every poets early training exercises,
winds about, loop after loop, and again and again is carried close to its own bed and then once
more diverted into a different course before it can flow into its own stream. But travel wont
make a better or saner man of you. For this we must spend time in study and in the writings of
wise men, to learn the truths that have emerged from their researches, and carry on the search
ourselves for the answers that have not yet been discovered. This is the way to liberate the spirit
that still needs to be rescued from its miserable state of slavery.
So long, in fact, as you remain in ignorance of what to aim at and what to avoid, what is
essential and what is superfluous, what is upright or honourable conduct and what is not, it will
not be travelling but drifting. All this hurrying from place to place wont bring you any relief, for
youre travelling in the company of your own emotions, followed by your troubles all the way. If
only they were really following you! Theyd be farther away from you: as it is theyre not at your
back, but on it! Thats why they weigh you down with just the same uncomfortable chafing
wherever you are. Its medicine, not a particular part of the world, that a person needs if hes ill.
Suppose someone has broken his leg or dislocated a joint; he doesnt get into a carriage or board
a ship: he calls in a doctor to have the fracture set or the dislocation reduced. Well then, when a
persons spirit is wrenched or broken at so many points, do you imagine that it can be put right
by a change of scenery, that that sort of trouble isnt so serious that it cant be cured by an
outing?
Travelling doesnt make a man a doctor or a public speaker: there isnt a single art which 
is acquired merely by being in one place rather wan another. Can wisdom, then, the greatest art
of all, be picked up in the course of taking a trip? Take my word for it, the trip doesnt exist that
can set you beyond the reach of cravings, fits of temper, or fears. If it did, the human race would
be off there in a body. So long as you carry the sources of your troubles about with you, those
troubles will continue to harass and plague you wherever you wander on land or on sea. Does it
surprise you that running away doesnt do you any good? The things youre running away from
are with you all the time.
What you must do, then, is mend your ways and get rid of the burden youre carrying.
Keep your cravings within safe limits. Scour every trace of evil from your personality. If you
want to enjoy your travel, you must make your travelling companion a healthy one. So long as
you associate with a person whos mean and grasping you will remain a money-minded
individual yourself. So long as you keep arrogant company, just so long will conceit stick to you.
Cruelty youll never say goodbye to while you share the same roof with a torturer. Familiarity
with adulterers will only inflame your desires. If you wish to be stripped of your vices you must
get right away from the examples others set of them. The miser, the swindler, the bully, the
cheat, who would do you a lot of harm by simply being near you, are actually inside you. Move
to better company: live with the Catos, with Laelius, with Tubero. If you like Greek company
too, attach yourself to Socrates and Zeno: the one would teach you how to the should it be forced
upon you, the other how to the before it is forced upon you. Live with Chrysippus, live with
Posidonius; they will give you a knowledge of man and the universe; they will tell you to be a
practical philosopher: not just to entertain your listeners to a clever display of language, but to
steel your spirit and brace it against whatever threatens. For the only safe harbour in this lifes
tossing, troubled sea is to refuse to be bothered about what the future will bring and to stand
ready and confident, squaring the breast to take without skulking or flinching whatever fortune
hurls at us.
When she created us, nature endowed us with noble aspirations, and just as she gave
certain animals ferocity, others timidity, others cunning, so to us she gave a spirit of exalted
ambition, a spirit that takes us in search of a life of, not the greatest safety, but the greatest
honour  a spirit very like the universe, which, so far as mortal footsteps may, it follows and
adopts as a model. It is self-assertive; it feels assured of honour and respect; it is master of all
things; it is above all things; it should accordingly give in to nothing; in nothing should it see a
burden calculated to bow the shoulders of a man.
Shapes frightening to the sight, Hardship and Death*
are not so at all if one can break through the surrounding darkness and look directly at
them. Many are the things that have caused terror during the night and been turned into matters
of laughter with the coming of daylight.
Shapes frightening to the sight, Hardship and Death.
Our Virgil perfectly rightly says that they are frightening, not in reality, but to the sight,
in other words that they seem so but in fact are not. Just what is there about them that is as
terrifying as legend would have us believe? Why, Lucilius, I ask you why should any real man
be afraid of hardship, or any human being be afraid of death? I constantly meet people who think
that what they themselves cant do cant be done, who say that to bear up under the things we
Stoics speak of is beyond the capacity of human nature. How much more highly I rate these
peoples abilities than they do themselves ! I say that they are just as capable as others of doing
these things, but wont. In any event what person actually trying them has found them prove
beyond him? Who hasnt noticed how much easier they are in the actual doing? Its not because 
theyre hard that we lose confidence; theyre hard because we lack the confidence.
If you still need an example, take Socrates, an old man who had known his full share of
suffering, who had taken every blow life could inflict, and still remained unbeaten either by
poverty, a burden for him aggravated by domestic worries, or by constant hardships, including
those endured on military service. Apart from what he had to contend with at home  whether
one thinks of his wife with her shrewish ways and nagging tongue, or his intractable children,
more like their mother than their father  his whole life was lived either in war-time or under
tyranny or under a democracy that outdid even wars and tyrants in its cruelties. The war went
on for twenty-seven years. After the fighting was ended, the state was handed over to the mercy
of the Thirty Tyrants, a considerable number of whom were hostile to him. The final blow was
his conviction and sentence on the most serious of charges: he was accused of blasphemy and of
corrupting the younger generation, whom, it was alleged, he turned into rebels against God, their
fathers and the state. After that came the prison and the poison. And so little effect did all this
have on Socrates spirit, it did not even affect the expression on his face. What a rare and
wonderful story of achievement! To the very last no one ever saw Socrates in any particular
mood of gaiety or depression. Through all the ups and downs of fortune his was a level
temperament.
Would you like another example? Take the modern one of Marcus Cato, with whom
fortune dealt in an even more belligerent and unremitting fashion. At every point she stood in his
way, even at the end, at his death; yet he demonstrated that a brave man can live in defiance of
fortune and can the in defiance of fortune. The whole of his life was passed either in civil war or
in conditions of developing civil conflict. And of him no less than of Socrates it is possible to say
that he carried himself clear of slavery* (unless, perhaps, you take the view that Pompey, Caesar
and Crassus were friends of freedom). When his country was in a state of constant change, no
one ever saw a change in Cato. In every situation he was placed in, he showed himself always
the same man, whether in office as praetor, in defeat at the polls, under attack in court, as
governor in his province, on the public platform, in the field, or in death itself. In that moment,
too, of panic for the Republic, when Caesar stood on the one side, backed by ten legions of the
finest fighting men and the entire resources and support of foreign countries as well, and on the
other stood Pompey, by himself a match for all comers, and when people were moving to join
either the one or the other, Cato all on his own established something of a party pledged to fight
for the Republic. If you try to picture the period to yourself you will see on the one side the
populace, the mob all agog for revolution, on the other the time-honoured elect of Rome, the
aristocracy and knighthood; and two forlorn figures, Cato and republicanism, between them. You
will find it an impressive sight, I can assure you, as you watch
The Son of Atreus and King Priam with
Achilles wroth with both.
For there is Cato denouncing each of them, trying to disarm the pair of them. And the
way he casts his vote between them is: If Caesar wins, I kill myself; if Pompey, I go into exile
What had a man to fear who, win or lose, had dictated to himself such a choice of fates as might
have been decreed him by an utterly exasperated enemy? And that is how he came to die,
carrying out his own self-sentence.
You will see, too, the capacity of man for hardship: on foot at the head of his troops he
crossed the deserts of North Africa. You see that thirst can be endured as well: always in armour,
trailing over a sun-baked plateau the remnants of a beaten army, an army without supplies, he
was invariably the last to drink whenever they came upon water. You see that a man can think 
equally little of either the distinction of office or the stigma of rejection: on the day of his
election defeat he played fives at the place of polling. You see that men can defy the might of
their superiors: for, with no one daring offend either Caesar or Pompey except to curry favour
with the other, Cato challenged the pair of them simultaneously. You see that a man can think as
little of death as of exile: he condemned himself to both, and war in the meantime.
We, then, can show as spirited an attitude to just the same things if we will only choose to
slip the yoke from our necks. But first we have to reject the life of pleasures; they make us soft
and womanish; they are insistent in their demands, and what is more, require us to make insistent
demands on fortune. And then we need to look down on wealth, which is the wage of slavery.
Gold and silver and everything else that clutters our prosperous homes should be discarded.
Freedom cannot be won without sacrifice. If you set a high value on her, everything else must be
valued at little.
LETTER CV
YES, Ill give you some rules to observe that will enable you to live in greater safety.
You for your part I suggest should listen as carefully to the advice I give you as you would if I
were advising you on how to look after your health at Ardea.
Now think of the things which goad man into destroying man: youll find that they are
hope, envy, hatred, fear and contempt. Contempt is the least important of the lot, so much so that
a number of men have actually taken shelter behind it for protections sake. For if a person feels
contempt for someone, he tramples on him, doubtless, but he passes on. No one pursues an
unremitting and persistent policy of injury to a man for whom he feels nothing but contempt.
Even in battle the man on the ground is left alone, the fighting being with those still on their feet.
Coming to hope, so long as you own nothing likely to arouse the greed or grasping instincts of
others, so long as you possess nothing out of the ordinary (for people covet even the smallest
things if they are rare or little known),* youll have nothing to worry about from the hopes of
grasping characters. Envy youll escape if you havent obtruded yourself on other peoples
notice, if you havent flaunted your possessions, if youve learnt to keep your satisfaction to
yourself. Hatred either comes from giving offence, and that youll avoid by refraining from
deliberately provoking anyone, or is quite uncalled for: here your safeguard will be ordinary tact.
It is a kind of hatred that has been a source of danger to a lot of people; men have been hated
without having any actual enemy. As regards not being feared, a moderate fortune and an
easy-going nature will secure you that. People should see that youre not a person it is dangerous
to offend: and with you a reconciliation should be both easy and dependable. To be feared inside
your own home, it may be added, is as much a source of trouble as being feared outside it  slave
or free, there isnt a man who hasnt power enough to do you injury. Besides, to be feared is to
fear: no one has been able to strike terror into others and at the same time enjoy peace of mind
himself. There remains contempt. The person who has made contempt his ally, who has been
despised because he has chosen to be despised, has the measure of it under his control. Its
disadvantages are negatived by the possession of respected qualities and of friends having
influence with some person with the necessary influence. Such influential friends are people with
whom it is well worth having ties, without being so tied up with them that their protection costs
you more than the original danger might have done.
But nothing will help quite so much as just keeping quiet, talking with other people as
little as possible, with yourself as much as possible. For conversation has a kind of charm about
it, an insinuating and insidious something that elicits secrets from us just like love or liquor. 
Nobody will keep the things he hears to himself, and nobody will repeat just what he hears and
no more. Neither will anyone who has failed to keep a story to himself keep the name of his
informant to himself. Every person without exception has someone to whom he confides
everything that is confided to himself. Even supposing he puts some guard on his garrulous
tongue and is content with a single pair of ears, he will be the creator of a host of later listeners 
such is the way in which what was but a little while before a secret becomes common rumour.
Never to wrong others takes one a long way towards peace of mind. People who know no
self-restraint lead stormy and disordered lives, passing their time in a state of fear commensurate
with the injuries they do to others, never able to relax. After every act they tremble, paralysed,
their consciences continually demanding an answer, not allowing them to get on with other
things. To expect punishment is to suffer it; and to earn it is to expect it. Where there is a bad
conscience, some circumstance or other may provide one with impunity, but never with freedom
from anxiety; for a person takes the attitude that even if he isnt found out, theres always the
possibility of it. His sleep is troubled. Whenever he talks about someone elses misdeed he thinks
of his own, which seems to him all too inadequately hidden, all too inadequately blotted out of
peoples memories. A guilty person sometimes has the luck to escape detection, but never to feel
sure of it.
LETTER CVII
WHEREs that moral insight of yours? Wheres that acuteness of perception? Or
magnanimity? Does something as trivial as that upset you? Your slaves have seen your
absorption in business as their chance to run away. So be it, you have been let down by friends 
for by all means let them keep the name we mistakenly bestowed on them and be called such just
to heighten their disgrace; but the fact is that your affairs have been freed for good and all of a
number of people on whom all your trouble was being wasted and who considered you
insufferable to anyone but yourself. Theres nothing unusual or surprising about it all. To be put
out by this sort of thing is as ridiculous as grumbling about being spattered in the street or getting
dirty where its muddy. One has to accept life on the same terms as the public baths, or crowds,
or travel. Things will get thrown at you and things will hit you. Lifes no soft affair. Its a long
road youve started on: you cant but expect to have slips and knocks and falls, and get tired, and
openly wish  a lie  for death. At one place you will part from a companion, at another bury
one, and be afraid of one at another. These are the kind of things youll come up against all along
this rugged journey. Wanting to die? Let the personality be made ready to face everything; let it
be made to realize that it has come to terrain on which thunder and lightning play, terrain on
which
Grief and vengeful Care have set their couch,
And pallid Sickness dwells, and drear Old Age.*
This is the company in which you must live out your days. Escape them you cannot,
scorn them you can. And scorn them you will if by constant reflection you have anticipated
future happenings. Everyone faces up more bravely to a thing for which he has long prepared
himself, sufferings, even; being withstood if they have been trained for in advance. Those who
are unprepared, on the other hand, are panic-stricken by the most insignificant happenings. We
must see to it that nothing takes us by surprise. And since it is invariably unfamiliarity that
makes a thing more formidable than it really is, this habit of continual reflection will ensure that
no form of adversity finds you a complete beginner.
Ive been deserted by my slaves! Others have been plundered, incriminated, set upon, 
betrayed, beaten up, attacked with poison or with calumny  mention anything you like, it has
happened to plenty of people. A vast variety of missiles are launched with us as their target.
Some are planted in our flesh already, some are hurtling towards us at this very moment, others
merely grazing us in passing on their way to other targets. Lets not be taken aback by any of the
things were born to, things no one need complain at for the simple reason that theyre the same
for everybody. Yes, the same for everybody; for even if a man does escape something, it was a
thing which he might have suffered. The fairness of a law does not consist in its effect being
actually felt by all alike, but in its having been laid down for all alike. Lets get this sense of
justice firmly into our heads and pay up without grumbling the taxes arising from our mortal
state. Winter brings in the cold, and we have to shiver; summer brings back the heat and we have
to swelter. Bad weather tries the health and we have to be ill. Somewhere or other we are going
to have encounters with wild beasts, and with man, too,  more dangerous than all those beasts.
Floods will rob us of one thing, fire of another. These are conditions of our existence which we
cannot change. What we can do is adopt a noble spirit, such a spirit as befits a good man, so that
we may bear up bravely under all that fortune sends us and bring our wills into tune with
natures; reversals, after all, are the means by which nature regulates this visible realm of hers:
clear skies follow cloudy; after the calm comes the storm; the winds take turns to blow; day
succeeds night; while part of the heavens is in the ascendant, another is sinking. It is by means of
opposites that eternity endures.
This is the law to which our minds are needing to be reconciled. This is the law they
should be following and obeying. They should assume that whatever happens was bound to
happen and refrain from railing at nature. One can do nothing better than endure what cannot be
cured and attend uncomplainingly the God at whose instance all things come about. It is a poor
soldier that follows his commander grumbling. So let us receive our orders readily and
cheerfully, and not desert the ranks along the march  the march of this glorious fabric of
creation in which everything we shall suffer is a strand. And let us address Jupiter, whose
guiding hand directs this mighty work, in the way our own Cleanthes did, in some most
expressive lines which I may perhaps be pardoned for translating in view of the example set here
by that master of expressiveness, Cicero. If you like them, so much the better; if not, you will at
least know that I was following Ciceros example.
Lead me, Master of the soaring vault
Of Heaven, lead me, Father, where you will.
I stand here prompt and eager to obey.
And evn suppose I were unwilling, still
I should attend you and know suffering,
Dishonourably and grumbling, when I might
Have done so and been good as, well. For Fate
The willing leads, the unwilling drags along.*
Let us speak and live like that. Let fate find us ready and eager. Here is your noble spirit
 the one which has put itself in the hands of fate; on the other side we have the puny degenerate
spirit which struggles, and which sees nothing right in the way the universe is ordered, and
would rather reform the gods than reform itself.
LETTER CVIII
THE subject you ask me about is one of those in which knowledge has no other
justification than the knowledge itself. Nevertheless, and just because it is so justified, youre in
a great hurry and reluctant to wait for the encyclopedia of ethics Im compiling at this very
moment. Well, I shall let you have your answer immediately, but first Im going to tell you how
this enthusiasm for learning, with which I can see youre on fire, is to be brought under control if
it isnt going to stand in its own way. What is wanted is neither haphazard dipping nor a greedy
onslaught on knowledge in the mass. The whole will be reached through its parts, and the burden
must be adjusted to our strength. We mustnt take on more than we can manage. You shouldnt
attempt to absorb all you want to  just what youve room for; simply adopt the right approach
and you will end up with room for all you want. The more the mind takes in the more it expands.
I remember a piece of advice which Attalus gave me in the days when I practically laid
siege to his lecture hall, always first to arrive and last to go, and would draw him into a
discussion of some point or other even when he was out taking a walk, for he was always readily
available to his students, not just accessible. A person teaching and a person learning, he said,
should have the same end in view: the improvement of the latter. A person who goes to a
philosopher should carry away with him something or other of value every day; he should return
home a sounder man or at least more capable of becoming one. And he will: for the power of
philosophy is such that she helps not only those who devote themselves to her but also those who
come into contact with her. A person going out into the sun, whether or not this is what he is
going out for, will acquire a tan. Customers who sit around rather too long in a shop selling
perfumes carry the scent of the place away with them. And people who have been with a
philosopher are bound to have derived from it something of benefit even to the inattentive. Note
that I say the inattentive, not the hostile.
Thats all very well, but dont we all know certain people who have sat at a
philosophers feet year after year without acquiring even a semblance of wisdom? Of course I
do  persevering, conscientious people, too. I prefer to call them a philosophers squatters, not
students. Some come not to learn but just to hear him, in the same way as were drawn to a
theatre, for the sake of entertainment, to treat our ears to a play, or music, or an address. Youll
find that a large proportion of the philosophers audience is made up of this element, which
regards his lecture-hall as a place of lodging for periods of leisure. Theyre not concerned to rid
themselves of any faults there, or acquire any rule of life by which to test their characters, but
simply to enjoy to the full the pleasures the ear has to offer. Admittedly some of them actually
come with notebooks, but with a view to recording not the content of the lecture, but words from
it  to be passed on to others with the same lack of profit to the hearer as they themselves derived
from hearing them. Some of them are stirred by the noble sentiments they hear; their faces and
spirits light up and they enter into the emotions of the speaker, going into a transport just like the
eunuch priests who work themselves into a frenzy, to order, at the sound of a Phrygian flute.
They are captivated and aroused not by a din of empty words, but by the splendour of the actual
content of the speakers words  any expression of bold or spirited defiance of death or fortune
making you keen to translate what youve heard into action straight away. They are deeply
affected by the words and become the persons they are told to be  or would if the impression on
their minds were to last, if this magnificent enthusiasm were not immediately intercepted by that
discourager of noble conduct, the crowd: very few succeed in getting home in the same frame of
mind.
It is easy enough to arouse in a listener a desire for what is honourable; for in every one
of us nature has laid the foundations or sown the seeds of the virtues. We are born to them all, all
of us, and when a person comes along with the necessary stimulus, then those qualities of the
personality are awakened, so to speak, from their slumber. Havent you noticed how the theatre 
murmurs agreement whenever something is spoken the truth of which we generally recognize
and unanimously confirm?
The poor lack much, the greedy everything.
The greedy man does no one any good,
But harms no person more than his own self.*
Your worst miser will clap these lines and be delighted at hearing his own faults lashed in
this manner. Imagine how much more likely it is that this will happen when such things are being
said by a philosopher, interspersing passages of sound advice with lines of poetry calculated to
deepen their hold on unenlightened minds. For the constricting requirements of verse, as
Cleanthes used to say, give ones meaning all the greater force, in the same way as ones breath
produces a far greater noise when it is channelled through a trumpets long and narrow tube
before its final expulsion through the widening opening at the end. The same things stated in
prose are listened to with less attention and have much less impact. When a rhythm is introduced,
when a fine idea is compressed into a definite metre, the very same thought comes hurtling at
one like a missile launched from a fully extended arm. A lot, for example, is said about despising
money. The listener is told at very considerable length that men should look on riches as
consisting in the spirit and not in inherited estates, and that a man is wealthy if he has attuned
himself to his restricted means and has made himself rich on little. But verses such as the
following he finds a good deal more striking.
He needs but little who desires but little.
He has his wish, whose wish can be
To have what is enough.
When we hear these lines and others like them, we feel impelled to admit the truth. The
people for whom nothing is ever enough admire and applaud such a verse and publicly declare
their distaste for money. When you see them in such a mood, keep at them and drive this home,
piling it on them, having nothing to do with plays on words, syllogisms, sophistries and all the
other toys of sterile intellectual cleverness. Speak out against the love of money. Speak out
against extravagance. When you see that youve achieved something and had an effect on your
listeners, lay on all the harder. It is hardly believable how much can be achieved by this sort of
speech, aimed at curing people, wholly directed to the good of the people listening. When the
character is impressionable it is easily won over to a passion for what is noble and honourable;
while a persons character is still malleable, and only corrupted to a mild degree, truth strikes
deep if she finds the right kind of advocate.
For my part, at any rate, when I heard Attalus winding up the case against the faults of
character, the mistaken attitudes and the evils generally of the lives we lead, I frequently felt a
sense of the sorry plight of the human race and looked on him as a kind of sublime being who
had risen higher than the limits of human aspiration. He himself would use the Stoic term king
of himself; but to me he seemed more than a king, as being a man who had the right to pass
judgement on the conduct and the character of monarchs. And when he began extolling to us the
virtues of poverty and showing us how everything which went beyond our actual needs was just
so much unnecessary weight, a burden to the man who had to carry it, I often had a longing to
walk out of that lecture hall a poor man. When he started exposing our pleasures and
commending to us, along with moderation in our diet, physical purity and a mind equally
uncontaminated, uncontaminated not only by illicit pleasures but by unnecessary ones as well, I
would become enthusiastic about keeping the appetites for food and drink firmly in their place.
With the result that some of this, Lucilius, has lasted with me right through life. For I started out 
on it all with tremendous energy and enthusiasm, and later, after my return to public life, I
managed to retain a few of the principles as regards which I had made this promising beginning.
This is how I came to give up oysters and mushrooms for the rest of my life (for they are not
really food to us but titbits which induce people who have already had as much as they can take
to go on eating  the object most desired by gluttons and others who stuff themselves with more
than they can hold  being items which will come up again as easily as they go down). This too
is why throughout life I have always abstained from using scent, as the best smell a body can
have is no smell at all. This is why no wine ever finds its way into my stomach. This is the
reason for my life-long avoidance of hot baths, believing as I do that it is effeminate as well as
pointless to stew ones body and exhaust it with continual sweating. Some other things to which
I once said good-bye have made their reappearance, but nevertheless, in these cases in which I
have ceased to practise total abstinence, I succeed in observing a limit, which is something
hardly more than a step removed from total abstinence (and even perhaps more difficult  with
some things less effort of will is required to cut them out altogether than to have recourse to them
in moderation).
Now that Ive started disclosing to you how much greater my enthusiasm was in taking
up philosophy as a young man than it is when it comes to keeping it up in my old age, I shant be
ashamed to confess the passionate feelings which Pythagoras inspired in me. Sotion used to tell
us why Pythagoras, and later Sextius, was a vegetarian. Each had a quite different reason, but
each was a striking one. Sextius believed that man had enough food to sustain him without
shedding blood, and that when men took this tearing of flesh so far that it became a pleasure a
habit of cruelty was formed. He argued in addition that the scope for peoples extravagance was
in any case something that should be reduced; and he gave reasons for inferring that variety of
diet was incompatible with our physical make-up and inimical to health. Pythagoras, on the other
hand, maintained that all creatures were interrelated and that there was a system of exchange of
souls involving transmigration from one bodily form to another. If we are to believe Pythagoras,
no soul ever undergoes death, or even a suspension of its existence except perhaps for the actual
moment of transfusion into another body. This is not the moment for inquiring by what stages or
at what point a soul completes its wanderings through a succession of other habitations and
reverts to human form. It is enough for our present purposes that he has instilled into people a
dread of committing the crime of parricide, in view of the possibility that they might, all
unknowing, come across the soul of an ancestor and with knife or teeth do it dreadful outrage,
assuming that the spirit of a relative might be lodging in the flesh concerned. After setting out
this theory and supplementing it with arguments of his own, Sotion would say, You cannot
accept the idea of souls being assigned to one body after another, and the notion that what we
call death is only a move to another home? You cannot accept that the soul which was once that
of a man may sojourn in wild beasts, or in our own domestic animals, or in the creatures of the
deep? You cannot accept that nothing ever perishes on this earth, instead merely undergoing a
change in its whereabouts? And that the animal world, not just the heavenly bodies that revolve
in their unalterable tracks, moves in cycles, with its souls propelled along an orbital path of their
own? Well, the fact that these ideas are ones which have been accepted by great men should
make you suspend judgement. You should preserve an open mind on the whole subject anyway.
For if these ideas are correct, to abstain from eating the flesh of animals will mean guiltlessness;
and even if they are not, it will still mean frugal living. What do you lose by believing in it all?
All I am depriving you of is what the lions and the vultures feed on.
Fired by this teaching I became a vegetarian, and by the time a year had gone by was 
finding it an enjoyable as well as an easy habit. I was beginning to feel that my mind was more
active as a result of it  though I would not take my oath to you now that it really was. I suppose
you want to know how I came to give up the practice. Well, my years as a young man coincided
with the early part of Tiberius reign, when certain religious cults of foreign origin were being
promoted, and among other things abstinence from certain kinds of animal food was regarded as
evidence of adherence to such superstitions. So at the request of my father, who did not really
fear my being prosecuted, but who detested philosophy, I resumed my normal habits. And in fact
he had little difficulty in persuading me to adopt a fuller diet. Another thing, though, which
Attalus used to recommend was a hard mattress; and that is the kind I still use even in my old
age, the kind which shows no trace of a body having slept on it. I tell you all this just to show
you the tremendous enthusiasm with which the merest beginner will set about attaining the very
highest goals provided someone gives him the necessary prompting and encouragement. Things
tend, in fact, to go wrong; part of the blame lies on the teachers of philosophy, who today teach
us how to argue instead of how to live, part on their students, who come to the teachers in the
first place with a view to developing not their character but their intellect. The result has been the
transformation of philosophy, the study of wisdom, into philology, the study of words.
The object which we have in view, after all, makes a great deal of difference to the
manner in which we approach any subject. If he intends to become a literary scholar, a person
examining his Virgil does not say to himself when he reads that magnificent phrase
Irrestorable, Time flies*
We need to bestir ourselves; life will leave us behind unless we make haste; the days are
fleeting by, carried away at a gallop, carrying us with them; we fail to realize the pace at which
we are being swept along; here we are making comprehensive plans for the future and generally
behaving as if we had all the leisure in the world when there are precipices all around us. No,
his purpose is to note that Virgil invariably uses this word flies whenever he speaks of the swift
passage of time.
Lifes finest days, for us poor human beings,
Fly first; the sicknesses and sufferings,
A bleak old age, the snatching hand
Implacable of merciless death, creep near.
It is the person with philosophy in his mind who takes these words in the way they are
meant to be taken. Virgil, he says, never speaks of the hours as passing but as flying, this
being the swiftest form of travel. He is also telling us that the finest ones are the first to be borne
away. Then why are we so slow to get ourselves moving so as to be able to keep up with the pace
of this swiftest of all things? The best parts of life are flitting by, the worse are to come. The
wine which is poured out first is the purest wine in the bottle, the heaviest particles and any
cloudiness settling to the bottom. It is just the same with human life. The best comes first Are we
going to let others drain it so as to keep the dregs for ourselves? Let that sentence stick in your
mind, accepted as unquestioningly as if it had been uttered by an oracle:
Lifes finest days, for us poor human beings,
Fly first.
Why finest? Because what is to come is uncertain. Why finest? Because while we are
young we are able to learn; when the mind is quick to learn and still susceptible to training we
can turn it to better ends. Because this is a good time for hard work, for studies as a means of
keeping our brains alert and busy and for strenuous activities as a means of exercising our
bodies; the time remaining to us afterwards is marked by relative apathy and indolence, and is all 
the closer to the end. Let us act on this, then, wholeheartedly. Let us cut out all distractions and
work away at this alone for fear that otherwise we may be left behind and only eventually realize
one day the swiftness of the passage of this fleeting phenomenon, time, which we are powerless
to hold back. Every day as it comes should be welcomed and reduced forthwith into our own
possession as if it were the finest day imaginable. What flies past has to be seized at.
These thoughts never occur to someone who looks at the lines I have quoted through the
eyes of our literary scholar. He does not reflect that our first days are our best days for the very
reason that the sicknesses creep near, with old age bearing down on us, hovering over our
heads whilst our minds are still full of our youth. No, his comment is that Virgil constantly
couples sicknesses and old age (and not without good reason, I can tell you: I should describe
old age itself as a kind of incurable sickness). The scholar further remarks on the epithet attached
to old age, pointing out that the poet speaks in the passage quoted of bleak old age and in
another passage writes
Where dwell wan Sicknesses and bleak Old Age.*
There is nothing particularly surprising about this way which everyone has of deriving
material for his own individual interests from identical subject-matter. In one and the same
meadow the cow looks for grass, the dog for a hare and the stork for a lizard. When a
commentator, a literary man and a devotee of philosophy pick up Ciceros book The State, each
directs his attention in different directions. The philosopher finds it astonishing that so much
could have been said in it by way of criticism of justice. The commentator, coming to the very
same reading matter, inserts this sort of footnote: There are two Roman kings one of whom has
no father and another no mother, the mother of Servius being a matter on which there is
uncertainty, and Ancus, the grandson of Numa, having no father on record. He observes further
that the man to whom we give the title Dictator and read about in the history books under the
same name was called the Master of the Commons by the early Romans; this title survives to the
present day in the augural records, and the fact that the person appointed by him as his deputy
was known as the Master of the Knights is evidence that this is correct. He similarly observes
that Romulus died during an eclipse of the sun; that the right of appeal to the Commons was
recognized as early as the period of the monarchy; there is authority for this in the pontifical
records, in the opinion of a number of scholars, in particular Fenestella. When the literary
scholar goes through the same book, the first thing he records in his notebook is Ciceros use of
reapse for re ipse, and sepse likewise for se ipse. He then goes on to examine changes in usage
over the years. Where, for example, Cicero uses the expression: Since we have been called back
right from the calx by this interruption of his, he notes that the calx was the name which the old
Romans gave to the finishing line in the stadium that we nowadays call the creta. The next thing
he does is assemble lines from Ennius, and in particular those referring to Scipio of Africa:
None, foe nor Roman, can assess the value
Of his succour and do justice to his feats.*
From this passage the scholar claims to deduce that the word succour to the early
Romans signified the rendering not merely of assistance but of actual services, Ennius saying
that no one, foe or Roman, was capable of assessing the value of the services Scipio rendered
Rome. Next he congratulates himself on discovering the source from which Virgil chose to take
the following:
Above whose head the mighty gates of heaven
Thunder.
He tells us that Ennius filched the idea from Homer and that Virgil filched it from 
Ennius, there being a couplet of Ennius (preserved in this very work of Ciceros I was
mentioning, The State) which reads
If any man may rise to heavens levels,
To me, alone, lie open heavens huge gates.
But enough, or before I know where I am I shall be slipping into the scholars or
commentators shoes myself. My advice is really this: what we hear the philosophers saying and
what we find in their writings should be applied in our pursuit of the happy life. We should hunt
out the helpful pieces of teaching, and the spirited and noble-minded sayings which are capable
of immediate practical application  not far-fetched or archaic expressions or extravagant
metaphors and figures of speech  and learn them so well that words become works. No one to
my mind lets humanity down quite so much as those who study philosophy as if it were a sort of
commercial skill and then proceed to live in a quite different manner from the way they tell other
people to live. People prone to every fault they denounce are walking advertisements of the
uselessness of their training. That kind of man can be of no more help to me as an instructor than
a steersman who is seasick in a storm  a man who should be hanging on to the tiller when the
waves are snatching it from his grasp, wrestling with the sea itself, rescuing his sails from the
winds. What good to me is a vomiting and stupefied helmsman? And you may well think the
storm of life is a great deal more serious than any which ever tosses a boat. What is needed is a
steering hand, not talking. And apart from this, everything which this kind of man says,
everything he tosses out to a thronging audience, belongs to someone else. The words were said
by Plato, said by Zeno, said by Chrysippus and Posidonius and a whole host more of Stoics like
them. Let me indicate here how men can prove that their words are their own: let them put their
preaching into practice.
Now that Ive given you the message I wanted to convey to you, Ill go on from here to
satisfy that wish of yours. But Ill transfer what you wanted from me to another, fresh letter, to
avoid your coming mentally weary to a subject which is a thorny one and needs to be followed
with a conscientious and attentive ear.
LETTER CXIV
YOU ask why it is that at certain periods a corrupt literary style has come into being; and
how it is that a gifted mind develops a leaning towards some fault or other (resulting in the
prevalence at one period of a bombastic form of exposition, at another of an effeminate form,
fashioned after the manner of songs); and why it is that at one time approval is won by
extravagant conceits and at another by sentences of an abrupt, allusive character that convey
more to the intelligence than to the ear; and why there have been eras in which metaphors have
been shamelessly exploited. The answer lies in something that you hear commonly enough,
something which among the Greeks has passed into a proverb: peoples speech matches their
lives. And just as the way in which each individual expresses himself resembles the way he acts,
so in the case of a nation of declining morals and given over to luxury forms of expression at any
given time mirror the general behaviour of that society. A luxuriant literary style, assuming that
it is the favoured and accepted style and not just appearing in the odd writer here and there, is a
sign of an extravagant society. The spirit and the intellect cannot be of different hues. If the spirit
is sound, if it is properly adjusted and has dignity and self-control, the intellect will be sober and
sensible too, and if the former is tainted the latter will be infected as well. Youve observed
surely, how a persons limbs drag and his feet dawdle along if his spirit is a feeble one? And how
the lack of moral fibre shows in his very gait if his spirit is addicted to soft living? And how if 
his spirit is a lively and dashing one his step is brisk? And how if it is a prey to madness or the
similar state of anger, his body moves along in an uncontrolled sort of way, in a rush rather than
a walk? Isnt this all the more likely to be the case where a persons intellect is concerned, his
intellect being wholly bound up with his spirit  moulded by and responsive to it and looking to
it for guidance?
The manner in which Maecenas lived is too well known for there to be any need to
describe the way he walked, his self-indulgent nature, his passion for self-display, his reluctance
that his faults should escape peoples notice. Well, then, wasnt his style just as undisciplined as
his dress was sloppy? Wasnt his vocabulary just as extraordinary as his turnout, his retinue, his
house, his wife? He would have been a genius if he had pursued a more direct path instead of
going out of his way to avoid being intelligible, had he not been as loose in matters of style as he
was in everything else. Which is why youll notice that his eloquence resembles a drunken
mans, tortuous and rambling and thoroughly eccentric. Could there be a worse expression than
the bank with mane of stream and woods? And look at men tilling with wherries the channel,
driving the gardens back with the shallows churning over. What about a person curvetting at a
womans beck, with lips on billing bent, a sigh the opening of his addresses, neck lolling like a
forest giant in his ecstasy? The unregenerate company rummage homes for victuals, raiding
them with provision jars and trading death for hope. But hardly should I call as witness on his
holy day my guardian spirit. Else the wick of a slender waxlight and sputtering meal. Mothers
or wives accoutre the hearth When you read this sort of thing, doesnt it immediately cross your
mind that this is the same man who invariably went around with casual clothes on in the capital
(even when Maecenas was discharging the emperors duties during the absence of Augustus, the
officer coming to him for the daily codeword would find him in informal attire), who appeared
on the bench, on the platform and at any public gathering wearing a mantle draped over his head
leaving both ears exposed, looking just like the rich mans runaway slave as depicted on the
comic stage? The same man whose public escort, at a time when the nation was embroiled in a
civil war and the capital was under arms and in a state of alarm, consisted of a pair of eunuchs,
and who went through a thousand ceremonies of marriage with his one wife?
These expressions of his, strung together in such an outrageous fashion, tossed out in
such a careless manner, constructed with such a total disregard of universal usage, reveal a
character equally revolutionary, equally perverted and peculiar. Maecenas greatest claim to
glory is regarded as having been his clemency: he spared the sword, refrained from bloodshed
and showed his power only in his defiance of convention. But he has spoilt this very claim of his
by these monstrous stylistic frolics; for it becomes apparent that he was not a mild man but a soft
one. That perplexing word order, those transpositions of words and those startling ideas which
have indeed the quality of greatness in them but which lose all their effect in the expression, will
make it obvious to anyone that his head was turned by overmuch prosperity.
It is a fault which is sometimes that of the man and sometimes that of the age. Where
prosperity has spread luxury over a wide area of society, people start by paying closer attention
to their personal turnout. The next thing that engages peoples energies is furniture. Then pains
are devoted to the houses themselves, so as to have them running out over broad expanses of
territory, to have the walls glowing with marble shipped from overseas and the ceilings picked
out in gold, to have the floors shining with a lustre matching the panels overhead. Splendour then
moves on to the table, where praise is courted through the medium of novelty and variations in
the accustomed order of dishes, making what normally rounds off a meal the first course and
giving people as they go what they used before to be given on arrival. Once a persons spirit has 
acquired the habit of disdaining what is customary and regards the usual as banal, it starts
looking for novelty in its methods of expression as well. At one moment it will disinter and
revive archaic or obsolete expressions; at another it will coin new, unheard of expressions and
give a word a new form; at another  this is something that has become very common recently 
the bold and frequent use of metaphor passes for good style. There are some who cut their
thoughts short and hope to win acclaim by making their meaning elusive, giving their audience a
mere hint of it; there are others who stretch them out, reluctant to let them go; there are others
still who do not merely fall into a defect of style (which is something that is inevitable if one is
striving for any lofty effect), but have a passion for the defect for its own sake.
So wherever you notice that a corrupt style is in general favour, you may be certain that
in that society peoples characters as well have deviated from the true path. In the same way as
extravagance in dress and entertaining are indications of a diseased community, so an aberrant
literary style, provided it is widespread, shows that the spirit (from which peoples words derive)
has also come to grief. And in fact you need feel no surprise at the way corrupt work finds
popularity not merely with the common bystander but with your relatively cultivated audience:
the distinction between these two classes of critic is more one of dress than of discernment. What
you might find more surprising is the fact that they do not confine themselves to admiring
passages that contain defects, but admire the actual defects themselves as well. The former thing
has been the case all through history  no genius that ever won acclaim did so without a measure
of indulgence. Name me any man you like who had a celebrated reputation, and Ill tell you what
the age he lived in forgave him, what it turned a blind eye to in his work. Ill show you plenty of
stylists whose faults never did them any harm and some who were actually helped by them. Ill
even say this: I could show you some men of the highest renown, men held up as objects of
wonder and admiration, in whose case to amend their faults would be to destroy them, their
faults being so inextricably bound up with their virtues.
Besides, there are no fixed rules of style. They are governed by the usage of society and
usage never stands still for any length of time. Many speakers hark back to earlier centuries for
their vocabulary, talking in the language of the Twelve Tables.* Gracchus, Crassus and Curio are
too polished and modern for them. They go right back to Appius and Coruncanius. Others, by
contrast, in seeking to confine themselves to familiar, everyday expressions, slip into an
undistinguished manner. Both these practices, in their different ways, are debased style (quite as
much so as the rejection of any expression that is not high-sounding, florid and poetical,
avoiding the indispensable expressions in normal use). The one is as much a fault as the other, in
my view, the first paying undue attention to itself and the second unduly neglecting itself. The
former removes the hair from its legs as well, the latter not even from its armpits.
Let us turn our attention to composition. How many species of fault can I show you
where this is concerned? Some like it broken and uneven, and go out of their way to disarrange
any passage with a relatively smooth and even flow. They want every transition to come with a
jolt, and see virility and forcefulness in a style the irregularities of which jar the ear. With some
other literary figures it is not a case of composition but of setting words to melodies, so sweetly,
softly do they glide along. What shall I say about the kind in which words are held back and keep
us waiting for a long time before they make their reluctant appearance right at the end of the
period? What of that, like Ciceros, which moves to its conclusion in a leisurely fashion, in a
gentle and delayed incline, and unvaryingly true to its customary rhythm?
In the field of the epigram, too, faults comprise a tameness and childishness, or a
boldness and daring that oversteps the bounds of decency, or a richness that has a cloying 
quality, or a barrenness in the outcome, an ineffectiveness, a ringing quality and nothing more.
These faults are introduced by some individual dominating letters at the time, are copied
by the rest and handed on from one person to another. Thus in Sallusts heyday abruptly
terminated sentences, unexpectedly sudden endings and a brevity carried to the point of obscurity
passed for a polished style. Lucius Arruntius, the historian of the Punic War and a man of
unusual simplicity of character, was a follower of Sallust and strove after that kind of style. By
means of money he procured an army, hired one, in other words, is an expression found in
Sallust. Arruntius took a fancy to this expression procured and found a place for it on every
page, saying in one passage: They procured our rout, in another: King Hiero of Syracuse
procured a war, and in another: This news procured the surrender of the people of Panormus to
the Romans. These are merely by way of giving you samples of the practice  the whole book is
rife with them. What was occasional in Sallust is of frequent, almost incessant occurrence in
Arruntius, which is easily enough explained, for whereas Sallust hit on such expressions
Arruntius cultivated them. You can see what the result is when some writers fault is taken as a
model. Sallust spoke of wintry rains. Arruntius, in the first book of The Punic War, says:
Suddenly the weather was wintry. In another place, when he wants to describe a particular year
as having been a cold one, he says: The whole year was wintry. In another passage he writes:
From there he despatched sixty transport vessels, lightly laden apart from troops and essential
crew, in spite of a wintry northerly gale. He drags the word in constantly, in every conceivable
place. Sallust at one point writes: Seeking, amid civil war, the plaudits of rectitude and
integrity. Arruntius was unable to restrain himself from inserting right at the beginning of his
first book mention of Regulus tremendous plaudits.
Now these faults, and others like them, stamped on a writers style by imitation, are not
themselves evidence of extravagant ways or corrupt attitudes. For the things upon which you
base any judgement on a persons psychology must be things peculiar to himself, things that
spring from his own nature, a hot-tempered man having a hot-tempered style, an emotional man
an over-excited one, a self-indulgent man a soft and flabby one and so on. And the last is the
manner one observes adopted by the sort of person who has his beard plucked out, or has it
plucked out in parts, who keeps himself close-shaven and smooth around his lips but leaves the
rest of it to grow, who wears cloaks in flamboyant colours, who wears a diaphanous robe, who is
reluctant to do anything that might escape peoples attention, who provokes and courts such
attention and so long as he is looked at does not mind whether it is with disapproval. Such is the
manner of Maecenas and every other writer whose stylistic errors are not accidental but
deliberate and calculated. It is something that stems from a serious affliction of the spirit. When a
person is drinking his tongue only starts stumbling after his mental faculties have succumbed and
given way or broken down. The same applies with this drunkenness  what else can one regard it
as?  of style. No one suffers from it unless his spirit is unstable.
See, then, that the spirit is well looked after. Our thoughts and our words proceed from it.
We derive our demeanour and expression and the very way we walk from it. If the spirit is sound
and healthy our style will be firm and forceful and virile, but if the spirit tumbles all the rest of
our personality comes down in ruins with it.
The queen unharmed, the bees all live at one;
Once she is lost, the hives in anarchy.*
The spirit is our queen. So long as she is unharmed, the rest remains at its post, obedient
and submissive. If she wavers for a moment, in the same moment the rest all falters.
LETTER CXXII
THE daylight has begun to diminish. It has contracted considerably, but not so much that
there is not a generous amount remaining still for anyone who will, so to speak, rise with the
daylight itself. More active and commendable still is the person who is waiting for the daylight
and intercepts the first rays of the sun; shame on him who lies in bed dozing when the sun is high
in the sky, whose waking hours commence in the middle of the day  and even this time, for a lot
of people, is the equivalent of the small hours. There are some who invert the functions of day
and night and do not separate eyelids leaden with the previous days carousal before night sets
in. Their way of life, if not their geographical situation, resembles the state of those peoples
whom nature, as Virgil says, has planted beneath our feet on the opposite side of the world
And when Dawns panting steeds first breathe on us,
For them the reddening Evening starts at length
To light their lamps.
There are some antipodes living in the same city as ourselves who, as Marcus Cato said,
have never seen the sun rise or set. Can you imagine that these people know how one ought to
live when they do not know when one ought to live? Can they really be afraid of death like other
people when this is what they have retreated into in their own lifetimes? They are as weird as
birds that fly by night. They may while away their hours of darkness to a background of wine
and perfume, they may occupy the whole of the time they spend, contrarily, awake eating
sumptuous dishes  individually cooked, too, in a long succession of different courses; but what
in fact they are doing is not banqueting but celebrating their own last rites. At least the dead have
their memorial ceremonies during the daytime. Heavens, though, no day is a long one for a man
who is up and about! Let us expand our life: action is its theme and duty. The night should be
kept within bounds, and a proportion of it transferred to the day. Poultry that are being reared for
the table are cooped up in the dark so as to prevent them moving about and make them fatten
easily; there they languish, getting no exercise, with the swelling taking possession of their
sluggish bodies and the inert fat creeping over them in their magnificent seclusion. And the
bodies of these people who have dedicated themselves to the dark have an unsightly look about
them, too, inasmuch as their complexions are unhealthier looking than those of persons who are
pale through sickness. Frail and feeble with their blanched appearance, in their case the flesh on
the living person is deathlike. And yet I should describe this as the least of their ills. How much
deeper is the darkness in their souls! Their souls are dazed and befogged, envious of the blind!
What man was ever given eyes for the sake of the dark?
Do you ask how the soul comes to have this perverse aversion to daylight and
transference of its whole life to the night-time? All vices are at odds with nature, all abandon the
proper order of things. The whole object of luxurious living is the delight it takes in irregular
ways and in not merely departing from the correct course but going to the farthest point away
from it, and in eventually even taking a stand diametrically opposed to it. Dont you think its
living unnaturally to drink without having eaten, taking liquor into an empty system and going
on to dinner in a drunken state? Yet this is a failing which is common among young people, who
cultivate their capacities to the point of drinking  swilling would be a better description of it  in
naked groups the moment theyre inside the doors of the public bath-house, every now and then
having a rub all over to get rid of the perspiration brought on by continually putting down the
piping hot liquor. To them drinking after lunch or dinner is a common habit, something only
done by rural worthies and people who dont know where the true pleasure lies: the wine that
gives a person undiluted enjoyment, they say, is the wine that makes its way into his system 
unobstructed instead of swimming about in his food; intoxication on an empty stomach is the
kind that gratifies a man.
Dont you think its living unnaturally to exchange ones clothes for womens?* Is it not
living unnaturally to aim at imparting the bloom of youth to a different period of life can there be
a sorrier or crueller practice than that whereby a boy is never, apparently, allowed to grow up
into a man, in order that he may endure a mans attentions for as long as may be? Wont even his
years rescue him from the indignity his sex ought to have precluded?
Is it not living unnaturally to hanker after roses during the winter, and to force lilies in
midwinter by taking the requisite steps to change their environment and keeping up the
temperature with hot water heating? Is it not living unnaturally to plant orchards on the top of
towers, or to have a forest of trees waving in the wind on the roofs and ridges of ones mansions,
their roots springing at a height which it would have been presumptuous for their crests to reach?
Is it not living unnaturally to sink the foundations of hot baths in the sea and consider that one is
not swimming in a refined fashion unless ones heated waters are exposed to the waves and
storms? Having started to make a practice of desiring everything contrary to natures habit, they
finally end up by breaking off relations with her altogether. Its daylight: time for bed! Alls
quiet: now for our exercises, now for a drive, now for a meal! The daylights getting nearer: time
we had our dinner! No need to do as the crowd does: to follow the common, well-worn path in
life is a sordid way to behave. Lets leave the daytime to the generality of people. Lets have
early hours that are exclusively our own.
This sort of person is to me as good as dead. After all, how far can a person be from the
grave, and an untimely one at that, if he lives by the light of tapers and torches?* I can recall a
great many people who led this kind of life at one time, with a former praetor among them, too,
Acilius Buta, the man who had squandered an enormous fortune which he had inherited, and
when he confessed his impoverished state to the emperor Tiberius was met with the remark,
You have woken up rather late. Montanus Julius, a tolerably good poet, noted for his closeness
to Tiberius and subsequent fall from favour, who used to give public readings of his verse, took
great delight in working sunrises and sunsets into his compositions. Hence the remark of Natta
Pinarius when someone was expressing disgust at the way Montanus reading had continued for
a whole day and declaring that his readings werent worth attending: Im quite prepared to listen
to him  can I say fairer than this  from sunrise to sunset. When Montanus had just read the
lines
The sun god starts his fiery flames to extend,
The rosy dawn to diffuse her light, and now
That plaintive bird, the swallow, starts to thrust
Her morsels down the throats of nestlings shrill,
With gentle bill supplying each its share,
With journeys yet to come,
one Varus called out, And Buta starts to sleep. Varus was a Roman knight, a friend of
Marcus Vinicius, who was always in attendance at good dinners, for which he used to qualify by
the sauciness of his tongue. It was he, too, who said a little later on when Montanus had read
The herdsmen now in byres have stalled their beasts,
And night now starts to bring the drowsy world
A dreamy stillness,
Whats that you say? Night, is it, now? Ill go and pay a morning call on Buta.
Butas upside-down way of life was a byword, and yet, as Ive said, at one time this sort 
of life was led by a great many people. The reason why some people live in this sort of way is
not that they think that night in itself has any special attraction, but that they get no pleasure out
of anything which is usual; apart from the fact that daylight is anathema to a bad conscience, a
person who experiences a craving or a contempt for things in proportion to their costliness or
cheapness looks down his nose at a form of illumination which does not cost him anything.
Moreover the man who lives extravagantly wants his manner of living to be on everybodys lips
as long as he is alive. He thinks he is wasting his time if he is not being talked about. So every
now and then he does something calculated to set people talking. Plenty of people squander
fortunes, plenty of people keep mistresses. To win any reputation in this sort of company you
need to go in for something not just extravagant but really out of the ordinary. In a society as
hectic as this one it takes more than common profligacy to get oneself talked about.
I once heard that delightful story-teller, Albinovanus Pedo, describing how he had lived
above Sextus Papinius. Papinius was one of the daylight-shy fraternity. About nine oclock at
night Id hear the sound of whips. Whats he doing? Id ask, and be told he was inspecting the
household accounts. About twelve Id hear some strenuous shouting. Whats that? Id ask, and
be told he was doing his voice exercises. About two Id ask what the noise of wheels meant, and
be told he was off for his drive. About daybreak there would be a scurrying in all directions, a
shouting for boys and a chaos of activity among stewards and kitchen staff. What is it? Id ask,
to be told he was out of his bath and had called for his pre-dinner appetizer. His dinner, then, it
might be said, exceeded the capacity of his day. Far from it, for he lived in a highly
economical fashion: all he used to burn up was the night. Hence Pedos remark when some
people were describing Papinius as being mean and grasping: I take it you would describe him
as being an artificial light addict as well.
You neednt be surprised to discover so much individuality where the vices are
concerned. Vices are manifold, take countless different forms and are incapable of classification.
Devotion to what is right is simple, devotion to what is wrong is complex and admits of infinite
variations. It is the same with peoples characters; in those who follow nature they are
straightforward and uncomplicated, and differ only in minor degree, while those that are warped
are hopelessly at odds with the rest and equally at odds with themselves. But the chief cause of
this disease, in my opinion, is an attitude of disdain for a normal existence. These people seek to
set themselves apart from the rest of the world even in the manner in which they organize their
time-table, in just the same way as they mark themselves off from others by the way they dress,
by the stylishness of their entertaining and the elegance of their carriages. People who regard
notoriety as a reward for misbehaviour have no inclination for common forms of misbehaviour.
And notoriety is the aim of all these people who live, so to speak, back to front. We therefore,
Lucilius, should keep to the path which nature has mapped out for us and never diverge from it.
For those who follow nature everything is easy and straightforward, whereas for those who fight
against her life is just like rowing against the stream.
LETTER CXXIII
IVE reached my house at Alba at last, late at night and worn out by the journey (which
wasnt so much long as thoroughly uncomfortable) to find nothing ready for my arrival  apart
from myself. So Im in bed, recovering from my fatigue, and making the best of this slowness on
the part of the cook and the baker by carrying on a conversation with myself on this very theme,
of how nothing is burdensome if taken lightly, and how nothing need arouse ones irritation so
long as one doesnt make it bigger than it is by getting irritated. My baker may be out of bread, 
but the farm manager will have some, or the steward, or a tenant. Bad bread, yes! youll say.
Wait, then: itll soon turn into good bread. Hunger will make you find even that bread soft and
wheaty. One shouldnt, accordingly, eat until hunger demands. I shall wait, then, and not eat
until I either start getting good bread again or cease to be fussy about bad bread. It is essential to
make oneself used to putting up with a little. Even the wealthy and the well provided are
continually met and frustrated by difficult times and situations. It is in no mans power to have
whatever he wants; but he has it in his power not to wish for what he hasnt got, and cheerfully
make the most of the things that do come his way. And a stomach firmly under control, one that
will put up with hard usage, marks a considerable step towards independence.
Im deriving immeasurable satisfaction from the way my tiredness is becoming
reconciled to itself. Im not asking for masseurs, or a hot bath, or any remedy except time. What
was brought on by exertion rest is taking away. And whatever kind of meal is on the way is
going to beat an inaugural banquet for enjoyment. I have, in fact, put my spirit to a sort of test,
and a surprise one, too  such a test being a good deal more candid and revealing. When the
spirit has prepared itself beforehand, has called on itself in advance to show endurance, it is not
so clear just how much real strength it possesses; the surest indications are the ones it gives on
the spur of the moment, when it views annoyances in a manner not merely unruffled but serene,
when it refrains from flying into a fit of temper or picking a quarrel with someone, when it sees
to everything it requires by refraining from hankering after this and that, reflecting that one of its
habits may miss a thing, but its own real self need never do so. Until we have begun to go
without them, we fail to realize how unnecessary many things are. Weve been using them not
because we needed them but because we had them. Look at the number of things we buy because
others have bought them or because theyre in most peoples houses. One of the causes of the
troubles that beset us is the way our lives are guided by the example of others; instead of being
set to rights by reason were seduced by convention. There are things that we shouldnt wish to
imitate if they were done by only a few, but when a lot of people have started doing them we
follow along, as though a practice became more respectable by becoming more common. Once
they have become general, mistaken ways acquire in our minds the status of correct ones.
Nobody travels now without a troop of Numidian horsemen riding ahead of him and a host of
runners preceding his carriage. One feels ashamed not to have men with one to hustle oncoming
travellers off the road and to show theres a gentleman coming by the cloud of dust they raise.
Everybody nowadays has mules to carry his crystal-ware, his myrrhine vessels and the other
articles engraved by the hands of master craftsmen. One is ashamed to be seen to have only the
kind of baggage which can be jolted around without coming to any harm. Everyones pages ride
along with their faces smeared with cream in case the sun or the cold should spoil their delicate
complexions; one is ashamed if there is no member of ones retinue of boys whose healthy
cheeks call for protection with cosmetics.
With all such people you should avoid associating. These are the people who pass on
vices, transmitting them from one character to another. One used to think that the type of person
who spreads tales was as bad as any: but there are persons who spread vices. And association
with them does a lot of damage. For even if its success is not immediate, it leaves a seed in the
mind, and even after weve said goodbye to them, the evil follows us, to rear its head at some
time or other in the future. In the same way as people whove been to a concert carry about with
them the melody and haunting quality of pieces theyve just heard, interfering with their thinking
and preventing them from concentrating on anything serious, so the talk of snobs and parasites
sticks in our ears long after weve heard it. And its far from easy to eradicate these haunting 
notes from the memory; they stay with us, lasting on and on, coming back to us every so often.
This is why we must shut our ears against mischievous talk, and as soon as it starts, too; once
such talk has made its entry and been allowed inside, it becomes a good deal bolder. Eventually
it reaches the stage where it says that virtue and philosophy and justice are just a lot of clap-trap.
Theres only one way to be happy and thats to make the most of life. Eating, drinking, spending
the money thats been left to you, thats what I call living  and thats what I call not forgetting
that youve got to die some day, too. The days are slipping by, and life is running out on us,
never to be restored. Why should we hesitate? Whats the point of being wise? Our years wont
always allow us a life of pleasure, and in the meantime while theyre capable of it and
clamouring for it, whats the point of thrusting austerity on them? Steal a march on death by
disposing here and now of whatever he is going to take away. Look at you  no mistress, no boy
to make your mistress jealous. Every day you go out sober. You eat as if you had to submit a
daily account book to your father for approval. Thats not living  thats merely being a part of
the life enjoyed by other people. And what madness it is to deny yourself everything and so build
up a fortune for your heir, a policy which has the effect of actually turning a friend into an
enemy, through the very amount that youre going to leave him, for the more hes going to get
the more gleeful hes going to be at your death. As for those sour and disapproving characters,
those critics of other peoples lives  and spoilers of their own  who set themselves up as moral
tutors to society at large, you neednt give tuppence for them; you neednt ever have any
hesitation when it comes to putting good living before a good reputation.
These are voices you must steer clear of like those which Ulysses refused to sail past until
he was lashed to the mast. They have the same power: they lure men away from country, parents,
friends and moral values, creating expectations in them only to make sport out of the
wretchedness of lives of degradation.* How much better to pursue a straight course and
eventually reach that destination where the things that are pleasant and the things that are
honourable finally become, for you, the same. And we can achieve this if we realize that there
are two classes of things attracting or repelling us. We are attracted by wealth, pleasures, good
looks, political advancement and various other welcoming and enticing prospects: we are
repelled by exertion, death, pain, disgrace and limited means. It follows that we need to train
ourselves not to crave for the former and not to be afraid of the latter. Let us fight the battle the
other way round  retreat from the things that attract us and rouse ourselves to meet the things
that actually attack us. You know the difference, Lucilius, between the postures people adopt in
climbing up and descending a mountain; those coming down a slope lean back, those moving
steeply upwards lean forward, for to tilt ones weight ahead of one when descending, and
backwards when ascending, is to be in league with what one has to contend with. The path that
leads to pleasures is the downward one: the upward climb is the one that takes us to rugged and
difficult ground. Here let us throw our bodies forward, in the other direction rein them back.
Are you now supposing that the only people I consider a danger to our ears are the ones
who glorify pleasure and inculcate in us a dread (itself a fearsome thing) of pain? No, I think
were also damaged by the people who urge us under colour of Stoic beliefs to do whats wrong.
They make much of our principle that only a man of wisdom and experience can really love.
Hes the one man with a natural gift for the art of love-making, then, they say, and hes
equally in the best position to know all about drink and parties. Well, heres a question for
discussion: up to what age is it proper to love young men?
This sort of thing may be all right for the Greeks, but the kind of talk to which we would
be better to turn our ears is this: No mans good by accident. Virtue has to be learnt. Pleasure is 
a poor and petty thing. No value should be set on it: its something we share with dumb animals
 the minutest, most insignificant creatures scutter after it. Glorys an empty, changeable thing,
as fickle as the weather. Povertys no evil to anyone unless he kicks against it. Death is not an
evil. What is it then? The one law mankind has that is free of all discrimination. Superstition is
an idiotic heresy: it fears those it should love: it dishonours those it worships. For what
difference does it make whether you deny the gods or bring them into disrepute? These are
things which should be learnt and not just learnt but learnt by heart. Philosophy has no business
to supply vice with excuses; a sick man who is encouraged to live in a reckless manner by his
doctor has not a hope of getting well.

